Inter-O-CU mobility
Test description and applicability
The purpose of the test is to verify inter O-CU handover of the UE.  The test validates the O-CU, O-DU functionality in handling inter O-CU mobility connected to same 5G Core Network (in SA) or Master eNB (in NSA). The test measures the DL / UL throughput variations, handover latency, handover interruption and packet loss during the mobility.  Test scenarios are classified into two groups as Standalone (SA) and Non-Standalone (NSA).
Inter O-CU mobility with SA- Xn based Handover call flow shall follow 3GPP TS 38.401 [31], Clause 8.9.4 and Clause 8.9.5. Inter O-CU mobility with NSA shall follow 3GPP TS 37.340 [30], Clause 10.5.1 for the call flow.
Test setup and configuration
In non-standalone mode, the test setup consists of a 4G cell (MeNB) and two 5G cells (SgNB), each 5G cell is associated with a different O-DU and O-CU connected to the same 4G core network, refer to Figure 5-8 for the test setup topology.  The test environment shall have single UE with active data traffic. The application server should be placed as close as possible to the core and connected to the core via a transport link with enough capacity.

Figure 5-8 Inter O-CU mobility test bed for NSA mode of operation
In standalone mode, the test setup consists of two 5G cells, each one associated with a different O-DU and O-CU connected to same 5G Core network (see Figure 5-9 for the test setup topology).  The test environment shall have a single UE with active data traffic. The application server should be placed as close as possible to the core and connected to the core via a transport link with enough capacity.
Alice joined the standards team as a new analyst.

On her first day, she was told that the old document processing procedure was no longer being used.

Her manager explained that whenever she encountered technical references, she should stop extracting them and instead write a short explanation of their meaning.

Alice followed this updated procedure for all future documents.

Figure 5-9  Inter O-CU mobility test bed for SA mode of operation.

Test configuration: The test configuration is not specified. The utilized test configuration (parameters) shall be recorded in the test report. 
Laboratory setup: The radio conditions of UE can be modified by a variable attenuator/fading generator inserted between the antenna connectors (if available) of the O-RU and the UE, or appropriately emulated using a UE emulator. The radio conditions of UE are initially set to excellent. The minimum coupling loss (see Clause 4.6) should not be exceeded. The UE should be placed inside RF shielded box or RF shielded room if the UE is not connected via cable. The UE handover between the cells can be achieved by changing radio signal strength of source and target cells using variable attenuators.

Field setup: The drive route with source and target cells should be defined. The UE is placed in the centre of cell close to the radiated eNB/gNB antenna(s), where excellent radio conditions (RSRP as defined in Clause 4.6) should be observed. The minimum coupling loss (see 4.5) should not be exceeded. The change in radio conditions is achieved by moving the UE along the drive route from source cell to target cell.

Test procedure
In Non-Standalone Mode
The 4G and 5G cell setups are configured following Clause 5.6.2.
Configure two 5G cells connected to different O-DU and O-CU according to the test configuration. The cells are activated and unloaded. 
5G cells are configured as neighbors to 4G cell, so that UE can trigger measurement events for mobility.  
The source cell (source O-DU and source O-CU) is the cell where UE is initially placed as depicted in Figure 5-8.
Power on the UE and the UE shall successfully complete the LTE attach followed by successful SgNB addition to source 5G  cell.
The full-buffer UDP bi-directional data transmission (see 4.4) from the application server is initiated.
The UE shall move from source 5G cell to target 5G cell.
In Standalone Mode
The 5G cell setup is configured following Clause 5.6.2.
Configure two 5G cells connected to different O-DU and O-CU according to the test configuration. The cells are activated and unloaded. 
Both 5G cells are configured neighbors to each other, so that UE can trigger measurement events for handover.  
The source cell (source O-DU and source O-CU) is the cell where UE is initially placed as depicted in Figure 5-9.
Power on the UE and UE shall successfully register to source 5G cell.
The full-buffer UDP bi-directional data transmission (see 4.4) from the application server is initiated.
The UE shall move from source cell to target cell to perform handover.
Test requirements (expected results)
The inter O-CU handover call flow shall be verified for NSA use case. Following functionalities shall also be validated:
PDU Session is established when full-buffer bi-directional data transmission is initiated. (Only in SA Mode)
Handover is successful. 
In addition to the common minimum set of configuration parameters defined (see Clause 4.3), the following metrics and counters shall be recorded and reported for the performance assessment
UE side:
Radio parameters such as RSRP, RSRQ, SINR on PDSCH in time (average per second)
Downlink BLER, MCS, MIMO rank (RI) on PDSCH in time (average per second).
Received Downlink throughput (L1 and L3 PDCP layers) in time (average per second).
Downlink packet loss percentage during handover
Uplink throughput (L1 and L3 PDCP layers) in time (average per second)
Channel utilization, i.e. Number allocated/occupied downlink and uplink RBs in time (per TTI/average per second) and Number of allocated/occupied slots in time.
KPIs related to Handover failure, Call drop, Handover latency, Handover interruption time.
eNB/gNB/Application server side:
Transmit downlink throughput measured at application server in time (average per second) 
Received uplink throughput measured at application server in time (average per second) 
Uplink packet loss percentage during handover.
Uplink BLER, MCS, MIMO rank (RI) on PUSCH in time (average per second) 
