LTE/5G NSA attach and detach of multiple UEs
Test description and applicability
The purpose of this test is to validate E2E O-RAN C-plane functionality with multiple UEs. These tests are valid for either LTE or 5G NSA. In this test scenario, the successful attach and detach procedure shall be validated by the “Power ON” and “Power OFF” of multiple (at least 2) UEs, as described in the following specifications:
LTE Attach as per 3GPP TS 23.401 [29], Clause 5.3.2.1 E-UTRAN Initial Attach 
LTE Detach as per 3GPP TS 23.401 [29], Clause 5.3.8.2.1 UE-initiated Detach procedure for E-UTRAN
5G NSA Attach as per 3GPP TS 23.401 [29], Clause 5.3.2.1 E-UTRAN Initial Attach and 3GPP TS 37.340 [30] Clause 10.2.1 EN-DC (Secondary Node Addition) 
5G NSA Detach as per 3GPP 23.401, Clause 5.3.8.2.1 UE-initiated Detach procedure for E-UTRAN and 3GPP TS 37.340 [30] Clause 10.4.1 EN-DC (Secondary Node Release) [29]
The test procedure shall be performed in excellent radio conditions for 10 iterations. Attach success rate, detach success rate, and attach latency shall be measured and captured.
Test setup and configuration
The network setup is a single cell scenario (i.e. isolated cell without any inter-cell interference – see Clause 4.7) with multiple stationary UEs (real or emulated) placed under excellent radio conditions as defined in Clause 4.6, using LTE RSRP (for LTE) or 5G SS-RSRP (for 5G NSA) as the metric.  The test is suitable for lab as well as field environments.  
Test configuration: The test configuration is not specified. The utilized test configuration (parameters) shall be recorded in the test report.  
Laboratory setup: The radio conditions experienced by the UEs can be modified using variable attenuators/fading generator inserted between the antenna connectors (if available) of the O-RU and the UE, or appropriately emulated using a UE emulator. The test environment should be setup to achieve excellent radio conditions (LTE RSRP (for LTE) or 5G SS-RSRP (for 5G NSA)  as defined in Clause 4.6) for the UEs, but the minimum coupling loss (see Clause 4.6) should not be exceeded.  The UEs should be placed inside an RF shielded box or RF shielded room if the UEs are not connected via cable.
Field setup: The multiple UEs are placed in the centre of the cell close to the radiated eNB/gNB antenna(s), where excellent radio conditions (LTE RSRP and 5G SS-RSRP as defined in Clause 4.6) should be observed. The minimum coupling loss (see 4.6) should not be exceeded.
Please refer to Figure 6-1 for the E2E test setups for LTE and 5G NSA.
Test procedure
The test steps below are applicable for either LTE or 5G NSA:
The test setup is configured according to the test configuration. The test configuration shall be recorded in the test report. The serving cell under test is activated and unloaded. All other cells are powered off.
The multiple UEs (real or emulated) are placed under excellent radio conditions (Cell centre close to radiated eNB/gNB Antenna) as defined by LTE RSRP (for LTE) or 5G SS-RSRP (for 5G NSA) in Clause  4.6. 
The End-to-end setup shall be operational for LTE or 5G NSA as applicable for the test scenario, and there shall not be any connectivity issues. 
Start the logs to capture the call flow and signalling messages. 
“Power ON” the multiple connected UEs to attach to the LTE or 5G NSA cell.  Wait for the successful attach of all UEs. 
“Power OFF” the multiple UEs to detach from the network. Wait for the successful detach of all UEs
Stop and save the test logs. The logs shall be captured and kept for test result reference and measurements 
Repeat steps 4 to 7, for a total of 10 times and record the KPIs mentioned in Clause 5.2.4
 Test requirements (expected results)
In addition to the common minimum set of configuration parameters (see Clause 4.3), the following metrics and counters shall be captured and reported in the test report for performance assessment.
Radio parameters such as RSRP, RSRQ
KPIs mentioned in Table 5-4 and Table 5-5
Validate the successful procedures for each UE from the collected logs. Expected success rate for Attach/Detach and Secondary Node Addition/Release KPI is 100%. The attach-detach procedure shall pass 10 consecutive times for all UEs to mark the test case as passing. The gap analysis shall be provided for the measured and the expected target KPIs.  
LTE Attach-Detach test case validations and KPI measurements 
Validate successful attach of each UE 10 times with LTE cell (Refer to 3GPP TS 23.401 [29], Clause 5.3.2.1 E-UTRAN Initial Attach). In the UE logs or applications installed on UE, check that UE is attached to correct cell (example PCI, Global eNB ID, ARFCN as per test configuration)
Measure the attach success rate by validating attach request and attach complete for each iteration. Record the attach success rate in Table 5-4 for each UE.
Measure the attach latency by calculating the time between Attach Request to attach complete. Capture the latency for each iteration and sort the latency value observed for each iteration in ascending order. Record the Minimum, Average (Sum of all latency value/ Total Iterations, Total Iterations are 10 in this case) and Maximum latency value observed in Table 5-5 for each UE
Validate successful detach attach with LTE cell (Refer to 3GPP TS 23.401 [29], Clause 5.3.8.2.1 UE-initiated Detach procedure for E-UTRAN). Signalling connection release shall be validated from message flow (UE context release and RRC connection release messages). Measure the detach success rate by validating detach request and detach accept for each iteration. Record the detach success rate in Table 5-4
5G NSA Attach-Detach test cases validations and KPI measurements
Validate successful multiple UE attach with 5G NSA cell (3GPP TS 23.401 [29], Clause 5.3.2.1 E-UTRAN Initial Attach and 3GPP TS 37.340 [30] Clause 10.2.1 EN-DC for Secondary Node Addition)). In the UE logs or applications installed on UE, check that UE is attached to correct cell (example PCI, Global eNB ID/Global gNB, ARFCN/NR-ARFCN as per test configuration for LTE /5G cells )
Measure the attach success rate by validating attach request and attach complete for each iteration. Also measure the secondary node addition success rate by validating the SgNB addition request and SgNB reconfiguration complete as per flow 3GPP 37.340 Clause 10.2.1 EN-DC for each iteration.  Record the attach success rate and secondary node addition success rate in Table 5-4 for each UE
Validate successful detach attach (LTE Detach and 5G Secondary Node release) with 5G NSA cell (Refer to 3GPP TS 23.401 [29] Clause, 5.3.8.2.1 UE-initiated Detach procedure for E-UTRAN and 3GPP TS 37.340 [30] Clause 10.4.1 EN-DC for Secondary Node Release)). Signalling connection release shall be validated from the message flow (UE context release and RRC connection release messages). 5G secondary node shall also get released successfully.  Measure the detach success rate by validating detach request and detach accept for each iteration. Record the detach success rate in Table 5-4 for each UE


Table 5-4 KPI to be captured for multi-UE attach-detach test case

Table 5-5 Latency KPI for multi-UE attach
