Figure 5.3.8.2-1 shows the case when UE camps on E-UTRAN and Detach Request is sent to MME.

Figure 5.3.8.2-1: UE-Initiated Detach Procedure - UE camping on E-UTRAN
NOTE 1:	For a PMIP-based S5/S8, procedure steps (A) are defined in TS 23.402 [2]. Steps 6, 7 and 8 concern GTP based S5/S8
1.	The UE sends NAS message Detach Request (GUTI, Switch Off) to the MME. This NAS message is used to trigger the establishment of the S1 connection if the UE was in ECM-IDLE mode. Switch Off indicates whether detach is due to a switch off situation or not. The eNodeB forwards this NAS message to the MME along with the TAI+ECGI of the cell which the UE is using.
	If the MME receives a Detach Request via a CSG cell with Switch Off parameter indicating that detach is not due to a switch off situation, and the CSG subscription for this CSG ID and associated PLMN is absent or expired, the MME shall trigger a MME-initiated Detach procedure as specified in clause 5.3.8.3.
	If Dual Connectivity is active for the UE, the PSCell ID shall be included in the Uplink NAS Transport that carries the Detach Request message.
NOTE 2:	Security procedures may be invoked if the NAS message is used to establish the S1 connection.
NOTE 3:	For emergency attached or RLOS attached UEs that were not successfully authenticated, security procedures are not performed.
2.	If the UE has no activated PDN connection, then steps 2 to 10 are not executed. If the PLMN has configured secondary RAT usage data reporting, the MME shall wait for step 11, if applicable, and shall perform step 12 before step 2 onwards. For any PDN connection to the SCEF, the MME indicates to the SCEF that the PDN connection for the UE is no longer available according to TS 23.682 [74] and steps 2 to 10 are not executed. For PDN connections to the P-GW, the active EPS Bearers in the Serving GW regarding this particular UE are deactivated by the MME sending Delete Session Request (LBI, User Location Information (ECGI), Secondary RAT usage data, PSCell ID) per PDN connection to the Serving GW. If ISR is activated, then the Serving GW shall not release the Control Plane TEID allocated for MME/SGSN until it receives the Delete Session Request message in step 5. If the UE Time Zone has changed, the MME includes the UE Time Zone IE in this message. If Secondary RAT usage data report was received from RAN, the MME includes this in the Delete Session Request message. If MME has received PSCell ID from eNodeB, the MME includes it in Delete Session Request.
3.	When the S-GW receives the first Delete Session Request message from the MME or SGSN in ISR activated state, the Serving GW deactivates ISR, releases the related EPS Bearer context information and responds with Delete Session Response (Cause).
	When the S-GW receives the Delete Session Request message from the MME or SGSN in ISR deactivated state, the Serving GW releases the related EPS Bearer context information and jumps to step 6 by sending a Delete Session Request (LBI) message per PDN connection to the PDN GW. After step 7 the Serving GW responds back to the MME/SGSN with the Delete Session Response (Cause and, optionally, APN Rate Control Status according to clause 4.7.7.3) message.
4.	If ISR is activated, MME sends Detach Indication (Cause) message to the associated SGSN. The Cause indicates complete detach.
5.	The active PDP contexts in the Serving GW regarding this particular UE are deactivated by the SGSN sending Delete Session Request (LBI, CGI/SAI) per PDN connection to the Serving GW. If the UE Time Zone has changed, the SGSN includes the UE Time Zone IE in this message.
6.	If ISR is activated, Serving GW deactivates ISR. If ISR is not activated in the Serving GW, the Serving GW sends Delete Session Request (LBI, User Location Information (ECGI or CGI/SAI), Secondary RAT usage data) per PDN connection to the PDN GW. If ISR is not activated, this step shall be triggered by step 2. This message indicates that all bearers belonging to that PDN connection shall be released. If the MME and/or SGSN sends UE's Location Information, and/or UE Time Zone Information, and/or Secondary RAT usage data in step 2 and/or step 5, the S-GW includes the User Location Information, and/or UE Time Zone, and/or User CSG Information with the least age in this message and/or Secondary RAT usage data information.
7.	The PDN GW acknowledges with Delete Session Response (Cause and, optionally, APN Rate Control Status according to clause 4.7.7.3).
8.	The PDN GW employs a PCEF initiated IP-CAN Session Termination Procedure as defined in TS 23.203 [6] with the PCRF to indicate to the PCRF that EPS Bearer is released if PCRF is applied in the network. If requested by the PCRF the PDN GW indicates User Location Information and/or UE Time Zone Information to the PCRF as defined in TS 23.203 [6].
9.	The Serving GW acknowledges with Delete Session Response (Cause and, optionally, APN Rate Control Status).
10.	The SGSN sends Detach Acknowledge message to the MME (optionally APN Rate Control Status). If received, the MME stores the APN Rate Control Status in the MM context.
11.	If Switch Off indicates that detach is not due to a switch off situation, the MME sends a Detach Accept to the UE.
12.	The MME releases the S1-MME signalling connection for the UE by sending S1 Release Command to the eNodeB with Cause set to Detach. The details of this step are covered in the "S1 Release Procedure", as described in clause 5.3.5.
NOTE 4:	In the "S1 Release Procedure", if Dual Connectivity was active at the time of the release, the eNodeB includes the PSCell ID.
Section:	6.2.1	Initial Attach Procedure with PMIPv6 on S2a and Anchoring in PDN GW	PMIPv6 specification, RFC 5213 [8], is used to setup a PMIPv6 tunnel between the trusted non-3GPP IP access and the PDN GW. In both roaming and non-roaming cases, S2a is present. It is assumed that MAG exists in the trusted non-3GPP IP access.

Figure 6.2.1-1: Initial attachment with Network-based MM mechanism over S2a for roaming, LBO and non-roaming scenarios
The optional interaction steps between the gateways and the PCRF in the procedures only occur if dynamic policy provisioning is deployed. Otherwise policy may be statically configured in the gateway.
This procedure applies to the Non-Roaming (Figure 4.2.2-1), Roaming (Figure 4.2.3-1) and Local Breakout (Figure 4.2.3-4) cases. For the Roaming and Local Breakout cases, the vPCRF forwards messages between the non-3GPP access and the hPCRF. In the Local Breakout case, the vPCRF forwards messages between the PDN GW and the hPCRF. In the Roaming and LBO cases, the 3GPP AAA Proxy serves as an intermediary between the Trusted Non-3GPP IP Access and the 3GPP AAA Server in the HPLMN. In the non-roaming case, the vPCRF is not involved at all.
This procedure is also used to establish the first PDN connection over a trusted non-3GPP access with S2a when the UE already has active PDN connections only over a 3GPP access and wishes to establish simultaneous PDN connections to different APNs over multiple accesses.
1)	The initial Non-3GPP access specific L2 procedures are performed. These procedures are Non-3GPP access specific and are outside the scope of 3GPP.
2)	The EAP authentication procedure is initiated and performed involving the UE, Trusted Non-3GPP IP Access and the 3GPP AAA Server. In the roaming case, there may be several AAA proxies involved. Subscription data is provided to the Trusted non-3GPP IP Access by the HSS/AAA in this step. The list of all the authorized APNs along with additional PDN GW selection information is returned to the access gateway as part of the reply from the 3GPP AAA Server to the trusted non-3GPP access as described in clause 4.5.1. The 3GPP AAA Server also returns to the trusted non-3GPP access the MN NAI to be used to identify the UE in Proxy Binding Update and Gateway Control Session Establishment messages (steps 4 and 10). If supported by Non-3GPP access network, the Attach Type is indicated to the Non-3GPP access network by the UE. The mechanism for supporting attach type is access technology specific and out of scope for 3GPP standardization. Attach Type indicates "Handover" when the UE already has active PDN connection(s) due to mobility from 3GPP access to non-3GPP access.
NOTE 1:	The MN NAI returned from the 3GPP AAA Server to the trusted non-3GPP access is a permanent IMSI based MN NAI.
3)	After successful authentication and authorization, the non-3GPP access specific L3 attach procedure is triggered. The UE may send requested APN to the Non-3GPP IP access in this step.
	If the UE sends a requested APN in this step, the Trusted non-3GPP Access verifies that it is allowed by subscription. If the UE does not send a requested APN the Trusted non-3GPP Access uses the default APN.
	The PDN Gateway selection takes place at this point as described in clause 4.5.1. This may entail an additional interaction with the Domain Name Server function in order to obtain the PDN GW address. If the PDN subscription profile returned by the 3GPP AAA Server in step 2 contains a PDN GW identity for the selected APN and the Attach Type does not indicate "Handover", the Non-3GPP access GW may request a new PDN GW as described in clause 4.5.1, e.g. to allocate a PDN GW that allows for more efficient routeing.
	The UE may request the type of address (IPv4 address or IPv6 prefix or both) during this step.
	If supported by the non-3GPP access, the UE may send Protocol Configuration Options in this step using access specific mechanisms. The Protocol Configuration Options provided by the UE may include the user credentials for PDN access authorization. In that case, in order to handle situations where the UE may have subscriptions to multiple PDNs, the UE should also send a requested APN to the non-3GPP IP access.
4)	The Trusted non-3GPP access initiates the Gateway Control Session Establishment Procedure with the PCRF, as specified in TS 23.203 [19]. The Trusted non-3GPP access provides the information to the PCRF to correctly associate it with the IP-CAN session to be established in step 6 and also to convey subscription related parameters to the PCRF, including the APN-AMBR (if forwarded by the trusted non-3GPP IP access) and Default Bearer QoS.
5)	The MAG function of Trusted Non-3GPP IP Access sends a Proxy Binding Update (MN-NAI, Lifetime, Access Technology Type, Handover Indicator, APN, GRE key for downlink traffic, Charging Characteristics, Additional Parameters) message to PDN GW. The MN NAI identifies the UE. The Lifetime field must be set to a nonzero value. Access Technology Type is set to a value matching the characteristics of the non-3GPP access. The MAG creates and includes a PDN connection identity if the MAG supports multiple PDN connections to a single APN. Handover Indicator is set to indicate attachment over a new interface as the UE has provided Attach Type indicating "Initial" attach. The Additional Parameters include the Protocol Configuration Options provided by the UE in step 3 and may also include other information. The MAG requests the IP address types (IPv4 address and/or IPv6 Home Network Prefix) based on requested IP address types and subscription profile in the same way as the PDN type is selected during the E-UTRAN Initial Attach in TS 23.401 [4]. If the PDN requires an additional authentication and authorization with an external AAA Server, the PDN GW performs such an additional authentication and authorization at the reception of the Proxy Binding Update.
NOTE 2:	Any time after initiation of Step 4, Step 5 can be initiated by MAG.
6)	The PDN GW initiates the IP-CAN Session Establishment Procedure with the PCRF, as specified in TS 23.203 [19]. The PDN GW provides information to the PCRF used to identify the session and associate Gateway Control Sessions established in step 4 correctly. The PCRF creates IP-CAN session related information and responds to the PDN GW with PCC rules and event triggers. If available, the PCRF may modify the APN-AMBR and provides the APN-AMBR and Default Bearer QoS to the PDN GW in the response message.
7)	The selected PDN GW informs the 3GPP AAA Server of its PDN GW identity and the APN corresponding to the UE's PDN Connection. The message includes information that identifies the PLMN in which the PDN GW is located. This information is registered in the HSS as described in clause 12. The PDN GW shall only use the APN-AMBR and Default Bearer QoS received from the 3GPP AAA server in this step if these parameters have not been received in step 6.
8)	The PDN GW processes the proxy binding update and creates a binding cache entry for the UE. The PDN GW allocates IP address(es) for the UE. The PDN GW then sends a Proxy Binding Acknowledgement (MN NAI, Lifetime, UE Address Info, GRE key for uplink traffic, charging ID, Additional Parameters) message to the MAG function in Trusted Non-3GPP IP Access, including the IP address(es) allocated for the UE. The UE Address Info includes one or more IP addresses. The Lifetime indicates the duration of the binding. If the corresponding Proxy Binding Update contains the PDN connection identity, the PDN GW shall acknowledge if multiple PDN connections to the given APN are supported. The Charging ID is assigned for the PDN connection for charging correlation purposes. The Additional Parameters may include Protocol Configuration Options and other information.
NOTE 3:	If UE requests for both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, both are allocated. If the PDN GW operator dictates the use of IPv4 addressing only or IPv6 addressing only for this APN, the PDN GW shall allocate only IPv4 address or only IPv6 prefix to the UE. If the UE requests for only IPv4 or IPv6 address only one address is allocated accordingly.
NOTE 4:	The MAG learns from the PBA whether the PDN GW supports multiple PDN connections to the same APN or not.
9)	The PMIPv6 tunnel is set up between the Trusted Non-3GPP IP Access and the PDN GW.
10)	The PCRF may update the QoS rules in the trusted non-3GPP access by initiating the GW Control Session Modification Procedure, as specified in TS 23.203 [19].
11)	L3 attach procedure is completed via non-3GPP access specific trigger. IP connectivity between the UE and the PDN GW is set for uplink and downlink directions. At this step the IP address information is provided to the UE. Unless already known from step 3, the Non-3GPP IP access should indicate the connected PDN identity (APN) to the UE. If supported by the non-3GPP access, the Protocol Configuration Options provided by the PDN GW in step 8 are returned to the UE in this step using access specific mechanisms.
Section:	6.1.1.3	PCC rule authorization and QoS rule generation	PCC Rule authorization is the selection of the QoS parameters (QCI, ARP, GBR, MBR, etc.) for the PCC rules.
The PCRF shall perform the PCC rule authorization for complete dynamic PCC rules belonging to AF sessions that have been selected in step 1, as described in clause 6.1.1.2, as well as for PCC rules without corresponding AF sessions. Based on AF instructions (as described in clause 6.1.5) dynamic PCC rules can be authorized even if they are not complete (e.g. due to missing service information regarding QoS or traffic filter parameters).
The PCC rule authorization depends on the IP-CAN bearer establishment mode of the IP-CAN session and the mode (UE or NW) of the PCC rule:
-	In UE/NW bearer establishment mode, the PCRF shall perform the authorization for all PCC rules that are to be handled in NW mode.
-	In UE/NW bearer establishment mode, for PCC rules that are to be handled in UE mode or when in UE-only bearer establishment mode, the PCRF shall first identify the PCC rules that correspond to a UE resource request and authorize only these.
	The PCRF shall compare the traffic mapping information of the UE resource request with the service data flow filter information of the services that are allowed for the user. Each part of the traffic mapping information shall be evaluated separately in the order of their related precedence. Any matching service data flow filter leads to an authorization of the corresponding PCC rule for the UE resource request unless the PCC rule is already authorized for a more specific traffic mapping information or the PCC rule cannot be authorized for the QCI that is related to the UE resource request (the details are described in the next paragraph). Since a PCC rule can contain multiple service data flow filters it shall be ensured by the PCRF that a service data flow is only authorized for a single UE resource request.
NOTE 1:	For example, a PCC rule containing multiple service data flow filters that match traffic mapping information of different UE resource requests could be segmented by the PCRF according to the different matching traffic mapping information. Afterwards, the PCRF can authorize the different PCC rules individually.
	The PCRF knows whether a PCC rule can be authorized for a single QCI only or a set of QCIs (based on SPR information or local configuration). If the processing of the traffic mapping information would lead to an authorization of a PCC rule, the PCRF shall also check whether the PCC rule can be authorized for the QCI that is related to the UE resource request containing the traffic mapping information. If the PCC rule cannot be authorized for this QCI, the PCRF shall reject the traffic mapping information unless otherwise stated in an access-specific Annex.
	If there is any traffic mapping information not matching to any service data flow filter known to the PCRF and the UE is allowed to request for enhanced QoS for traffic not belonging to operator-controlled services, the PCRF shall authorize this traffic mapping information by adding the respective service data flow filter to a new or existing PCC. If the PCRF received an SDF filter identifier together with this traffic mapping information, the PCRF shall modify the existing PCC rule if the PCC rule is authorized for a GBR QCI.
NOTE 2:	If the PCC rule is authorized for a non-GBR QCI, the PCRF may either create a new PCC rule or modify the existing PCC rule.
	The PCC rule that needs to be modified can be identified by the service data flow filter the SDF filter identifier refers to. The requested QoS shall be checked against the subscription limitations for traffic not belonging to operator-controlled services.
	If the PCRF needs to perform the authorization based on incomplete service information and thus cannot associate a PCC rule with a single IP-CAN bearer, then the PCRF shall generate for the affected service data flow an individual PCC rule per IP-CAN bearer that could carry that service data flow. Once the PCRF receives the complete service information, the PCC rule on the IP-CAN bearer with the matching traffic mapping information shall be updated according to the service information. Any other PCC rule(s) previously generated for the same service data flow shall be removed by the PCRF.
NOTE 3:	This is required to enable the successful activation or modification of IP-CAN bearers before knowing the intended use of the IP-CAN bearers to carry the service data flow(s).
	For an IP-CAN, where the PCRF gains no information about the uplink IP flows (i.e. the UE provided traffic mapping information contains no information about the uplink IP flows), the binding mechanism shall assume that, for bi-directional service data flows, both downlink and uplink packets travel on the same IP-CAN bearer.
	Whenever the service data flow template or the UE provided traffic mapping information change, the existing authorizations shall be re-evaluated, i.e. the authorization procedure specified in this clause, is performed. The re-evaluation may, for a service data flow, require a new authorization for a different UE provided mapping information.
	Based on PCRF configuration or AF instructions (as described in clause 6.1.5) dynamic PCC rules may have to be first authorized for the default QCI/default bearer (i.e. bearer without UE provided traffic mapping information) until a corresponding UE resource request occurs.
NOTE 4:	This is required to enable services that start before dedicated resources are allocated.
A PCC rule for a service data flow that is a candidate for vSRVCC according to TS 23.216 [28] shall have the PS to CS session continuity indicator set.
For the authorization of a PCC rule the PCRF shall take into account the IP-CAN specific restrictions and other information available to the PCRF. Each PCC rule receives a set of QoS parameters that can be supported by the IP-CAN. The authorization of a PCC rule associated with an emergency service and Restricted Local Operator Services shall be supported without subscription information (e.g. information stored in the SPR). The PCRF shall apply policies configured for the emergency service and Restricted Local Operator Services.
When both a Gx and associated Gxx interface(s) exist for an IP-CAN session, the PCRF shall generate QoS rules for all the authorized PCC rules in this step. The PCRF shall ensure consistency between the QoS rules and PCC rules authorized for the same service data flow when QoS rules are derived from corresponding PCC rules.
When flow mobility applies for the IP-CAN Session, one IP-CAN session may be associated to multiple Gateway Control Sessions with separate BBRFs. In this case, the PCRF shall provision QoS rules only to the appropriate BBERF based on IP flow mobility routing rules received from the PCEF.