5G SA registration and deregistration of single UE
Test description and applicability
The purpose of the test is to verify the full registration and de-registration procedure with a single UE. The test also verifies the PDU session establishment and release procedures.
The test focuses on the procedure of ‘Initial registration’ as defined in 3GPP TS 23.502 [28] Clause 4.2.2.2.2.
The test focuses on the procedure of ‘UE-initiated de-registration’ as defined in 3GPP TS 23.502 [28] Clause 4.2.2.3.2.
This test also validates PDU session establishment and release procedures. 
The test validates the 3GPP standard registration/de-registration procedure and the latency of the procedure. Bi-directional data transmission shall be observed before the de-registration procedure to verify the stability of the network slice.
Test setup and configuration
The test setup is a single cell scenario (i.e. isolated cell without any inter-cell interference – see Clause 4.7) with a stationary UE (real or emulated) placed under excellent radio conditions as defined in Clause 4.6, using SS-RSRP as the metric. Within the cell there shall be only one active UE. The application server should be placed as close as possible to the core/core emulator and connected to the core/core emulator via a transport link with enough capacity so as not to limit the expected data throughput. The UE, RAN, and 5G Core shall support the network slicing, at least for one Single Network Slice Selection Assistance Information (S-NSSAI). The test is suitable for lab as well as field environments.  
Test configuration: The test configuration is not specified. The utilized test configuration (parameters) shall be recorded in the test report.  
Laboratory setup: The radio conditions experienced by the UE can be modified using a variable attenuator/fading generator inserted between the antenna connectors (if available) of the O-RU and the UE, or appropriately emulated using a UE emulator. The test environment should be setup to achieve excellent radio conditions (using SS-RSRP as defined in Clause 4.6) for the UE, but the minimum coupling loss (see Clause 4.6) should not be exceeded.  The UE should be placed inside an RF shielded box or RF shielded room if the UE is not connected via cable.
Field setup: The UE is placed in the centre of cell close to the radiated eNB/gNB antenna(s), where excellent radio conditions (SS-RSRP as defined in Clause 4.6) should be observed. The minimum coupling loss (see 4.6) should not be exceeded.
Please refer Figure 6-1 for E2E test setup for 5G SA.
Test procedure
Below are the test procedure steps
The test setup is configured according to the test configuration. The test configuration shall be recorded in the test report. The serving cell under test is activated and unloaded. All other cells are powered off.
Power on the UE and the UE shall send REGISTRATION REQUEST message.  UE shall successfully register to the 5G SA network. 
Full-buffer UDP bi-directional data transmission (see Clause 4.4) between the application server and UE is initiated.
The registration procedure messages shall be captured, and the latency of the registration procedure shall be measured and recorded in Table 5-6. The duration of the test shall be at least 3 minutes when the throughput is stable. The PDU session establishment procedure messages shall also be captured and verified.
Power off the UE and UE shall send DEREGISTRATION REQUEST message. UE shall successfully de-register from the 5G SA network.
The de-registration procedure messages shall be captured, and the latency of de-registration procedure shall be measured and recorded in Table 5-6. The PDU session release procedure messages shall also be captured and verified.
Repeat steps 2 to 6, for a total of 10 times and record the KPIs mentioned in Table 5-6.
Test requirements (expected results)
In addition to the common minimum set of configuration parameters (see Clause 4.3), the following metrics and counters shall be captured and reported in the test report for the performance assessment.
Radio parameters such as RSRP, RSRQ, CQI, PDSCH SINR (average sample per second)
Latency KPI mentioned in Table 5-6
Validate from collected logs registration (as per 3GPP TS 23.502 [28] Clause 4.2.2.2.2) and deregistration (as per 3GPP TS 23.502 [28] Clause 4.2.2.3.2) procedures and also validate ‘UE Requested PDU Session Establishment for Non-roaming and Roaming with Local Breakout case’ as defined in 3GPP TS 23.502 [28] Clause 4.3.2.2.1, and the procedure of ‘PDU Session Release for UE or network requested PDU Session Release for Non-Roaming and Roaming with Local Breakout case’ as defined in 3GPP TS 23.502 [28] Clause 4.3.4.2. The procedure shall pass 10 consecutive times to mark the test case as passing. The gap analysis shall be provided for the measured and the expected target KPIs.
The Registration Time latency is measured by calculating the time between Registration Request to Registration Complete; The De-registration Time latency is measured by calculating the time between De-registration Request to Signaling Connection Release. Capture the latency for each iteration and sort the latency value observed for each iteration in ascending order. Record the Minimum, Average (Sum of all latency value/ Total Iterations, Total Iterations are 10 in this case) and Maximum latency value observed in Table 5-6. 
Table 5-6 5G SA registration/de-registration latency KPI record table of single UE


==================================================
RECURSIVE EXTRACTION RESULTS
==================================================

4.3.4.2	UE or network requested PDU Session Release for Non-Roaming and Roaming with Local Breakout
Figure 4.3.4.2-1 captures both the UE Requested PDU Session Release procedure and the network requested PDU Session Release procedure. The procedure allows the UE to request the release of one PDU Session. The procedure also allows the AMF, the SMF or the PCF to initiate the release of a PDU Session. In the case of LBO, the procedure is as in the case of non-roaming with the difference that the AMF, the SMF, the UPF and the PCF are located in the visited network.

Figure 4.3.4.2-1: UE or network requested PDU Session Release for non-roaming and roaming with local breakout
1.	The procedure is triggered by one of the following events:
1a.	(UE requested) The UE initiates the UE Requested PDU Session Release procedure by the transmission of an NAS message (N1 SM container (PDU Session Release Request (PDU session ID)), PDU Session ID). The NAS message is forwarded by the (R)AN to the AMF with an indication of User Location Information. This message is relayed to the SMF corresponding to the PDU Session ID via N2 and the AMF. The AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext service operation and provides the N1 SM container to the SMF together with User Location Information (ULI) received from the (R)AN.
NOTE 1:	Depending on the Access Type, when the UE is in CM-IDLE state, the UE can trigger a Service Request procedure before being able to release the PDU Session.
1b.	(PDU Session Release initiated by the PCF) The PCF may invoke an SM Policy Association Termination procedure as defined in clause 4.16.6 to request the release of the PDU Session.
1c.	The AMF may invoke the Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext service operation to request the release of the PDU Session in the case of mismatch of PDU Session status between UE and AMF or other cases where neither N1 nor N2 SM signalling is needed before the releasing of SM context.
NOTE 2:	The AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext service operation when the AMF determines to release the PDU Session due to S-NSSAI is removed from Allowed NSSAI and the AMF separately updates the UE with a PDU Session status without the PDU Session, in a Registration Accept as specified in clause 4.2.2.2.2.
1d.	(R)AN may decide to indicate to the SMF that the PDU Session related resource is released, e.g. when all the QoS Flow(s) of the PDU Session are released.
NOTE 3:	In this case, it's up to SMF to decide whether to keep the PDU Session with user plane connection deactivated or release the PDU Session.
1e.	(PDU Session Release initiated by the SMF).
	The SMF may decide to release a PDU Session under the following scenarios:
-	Based on a request from the DN (cancelling the UE authorization to access to the DN);
-	Based on a request from the UDM (subscription change) or from the CHF;
-	If the SMF received an event notification from the AMF that the UE is out of LADN service area;
-	Based on locally configured policy (e.g. the release procedure may be related with the UPF re-allocation for SSC mode 2 / mode 3);
-	If the SMF is notified by the (R)AN that the PDU Session resource establishment has failed during mobility procedure;
-	The SMF initiates release of an emergency PDU Session when the UPF reports detection of PDU Session inactivity for a specified period as specified in clause 4.4.2.2;
-	Based on PDU Session inactivity report from the UPF if the S-NSSAI of a PDU Session for non-roaming subscribers is subject to usage control as described in clause 5.15.15 of TS 23.501 [2]; or
-	If the SMF is notified by the AMF that the S-NSSAI of the PDU Session with SSC mode 1 or SSC mode 2 is to be replaced with Alternative S-NSSAI, and if the SMF determines that a new PDU Session is to be established on the Alternative S-NSSAI, the SMF initiates release of the PDU Session, as described in clause 5.15.19 of TS 23.501 [2].
1f.	The AMF may invoke the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext service operation with a release indication to request the release of the PDU Session where:
-	N1 signalling is needed and N2 SM signalling may be needed before releasing the SM context with appropriate cause value (e.g. due to a change of the set of network slices for a UE where a network slice instance is no longer available as described in clause 5.15.5.2.2 of TS 23.501 [2];
-	The AAA Server triggered Network Slice-Specific Re-authentication and Re-authorization procedure fails as specified in clause 4.2.9.2;
-	The AAA Server triggered Slice-Specific Authorization Revocation takes place as specified in clause 4.2.9.4;
-	AMF determines that Control Plane Only indication associated with PDU Session is not applicable any longer as described in clause 5.31.4.1 of TS 23.501 [2]);
-	The MBSR authorization state is changed from "authorized" to "not authorized" as described in clause 5.35A.4 of TS 23.501 [2];
-	The MWAB-UE BH PDU session release is triggered due to S-NSSAIs/DNNs related to BH PDU sessions being removed from subscription or invalid as described in clause 5.49.3 of TS 23.501 [2];
-	The Network Slice instance is congested or not available as described in clause 5.15.5.3 of TS 23.501 [2].
-	There is no LADN service area for the DNN and S-NSSAI of the PDU session and the AMF determines to configure the LADN service area configured per LADN DNN and S-NSSAI for the associated DNN and S-NSSAI (e.g. due to notification from UDM or local configuration update);
-	The PDU session is subject to LADN per LADN DNN and S-NSSAI and the AMF determines the LADN service area for the DNN and S-NSSAI is removed (e.g. due to notification from UDM or local configuration update).
	If the SMF receives one of the triggers in step 1a, 1b, 1c, 1e, or 1f, the SMF starts PDU Session Release procedure. If the cause value in step 1f indicates the Network Slice instance is congested or not available, the SMF triggers the impacted UE(s) to establish new PDU session(s) associated with the same S-NSSAI by using the procedures for PDU Session(s) of SSC mode 2 or SSC mode 3 as defined in clause 4.3.5.
	If interworking with TSN deployed in the transport network is supported the SMF/CUC shall initiate the release of TN streams via UNI.
2.	The SMF releases the IP address / Prefix(es) that were allocated to the PDU Session and releases the corresponding User Plane resources:
2a.	The SMF sends an N4 Session Release Request (N4 Session ID) message to the UPF(s) of the PDU Session. The UPF(s) shall drop any remaining packets of the PDU Session and release all tunnel resource and contexts associated with the N4 Session.
	If interworking with TSN deployed in the transport network is supported and the UPF supports CN-TL and TN streams are associated with the PDU session, the SMF/CUC shall initiate to the CN-TL the deletion of TN stream configurations.
2b.	The UPF(s) acknowledges the N4 Session Release Request by the transmission of an N4 Session Release Response (N4 Session ID, [Small Data Rate Control Status], [APN Rate Control Status]) message to the SMF.
	If UPF/CN-TL has performed the deletion of TN stream based on the request received from the SMF/CUC in step 2a, the UPF/CN-TL shall confirm the deletion of TN stream configurations.
	The UPF includes Small Data Rate Control Status if the PDU Session used Small Data Rate Control.
	If a NEF has been selected as anchor of the Control Plane CIoT 5GS Optimisation enabled PDU session which is Unstructured PDU Session Type as described in clause 4.3.2.2 and the SMF-NEF Connection is released for this PDU Session.
	If interworking with TSN deployed in the transport network is supported and the NG-RAN supports AN-TL and TN streams are associated with the released PDU session, the SMF/CUC shall initiate to the AN-TL the deletion of TN stream configurations.
NOTE 4:	If there are multiple UPFs associated with the PDU Session (e.g. due to the insertion of UL CL or Branching Point, or redundant I-UPFs if the redundant I-UPFs are used for URLLC), the Session Release Request procedure (steps 2a and 2b) is done for each UPF. In order to avoid charging of PDUs that later get dropped, the SMF performs the N4 Session Release first with the UPF(s) performing usage reporting, before releasing the other UPF(s) that forward traffic for the same user plane resources.
3	If the PDU Session Release is initiated by the PCF and SMF and the SMF has been notified by the AMF that UE is unreachable, e.g. due to the UE is in MICO mode or periodical registration failure, the procedure continues in step 11 by SMF notifying the AMF that the PDU Session is released by invoking the Nsmf_PDUSession_SMContextStatusNotify. The rest of step 3 and the steps 4-10 are skipped.
	If the PDU Session Release procedure was triggered by steps 1a, 1b, 1d or 1e above, the SMF creates an N1 SM including PDU Session Release Command message (PDU Session ID, Cause, Alternative S-NSSAI). The Cause may indicate a trigger to establish a new PDU Session with the same characteristics (e.g. when procedures related with SSC mode 2 are invoked). .If the cause value indicates that a PDU Session re-establishment on the Alternative S-NSSAI is required the PDU Session Release Command message also includes the Alternative S-NSSAI. The UE establishes a new PDU Session on the Alternative S-NSSAI, as described in clause 5.15.19 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the User Plane connection of the PDU Session is activated, the message sent by the SMF to the AMF shall include N2 SM Resource Release request. If the User Plane connection of the PDU Session is not activated, the message sent by the SMF to the AMF shall not include N2 SM Resource Release request.
NOTE 5:	SSC modes are defined in clause 5.6.9 of TS 23.501 [2].
3a.	(If the PDU Session Release is initiated by the UE in step 1a or has been triggered by (R)AN in step 1d) The SMF responds to the AMF with the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext response (N2 SM Resource Release request, N1 SM container (PDU Session Release Command)). N2 SM Resource Release request is included if the PDU Session Release is initiated by the UE and if the UP connection of the PDU Session is active. Neither N2 SM Resource Release request nor N1 SM container is included if the PDU Session Release is triggered by (R)AN and the SMF decides to keep the PDU session with user plane connection deactivated and the subsequent steps are skipped.
3b.	If the PDU Session Release is initiated by the SMF or the PCF, the SMF invokes the Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer service operation (N1 SM container (PDU Session Release Command), skip indicator).
	If the UP connection of the PDU Session is active, the SMF shall also include the N2 Resource Release request (PDU Session ID) in the Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer, to release the (R)AN resources associated with the PDU Session.
	The "skip indicator" tells the AMF whether it may skip sending the N1 SM container to the UE (e.g. when the UE is in CM-IDLE state). SMF includes the "skip indicator" in the Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer except when the procedure is triggered to change PDU Session Anchor of a PDU Session with SSC mode 2.
	If the UE is in CM-IDLE state and "skip indicator" is included in the Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer service operation or if the UE is in CM-IDLE state and "skip indicator" is not included in the Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer service operation but the AMF detects that the UE context contains Paging Restriction Information indicating that all paging is restricted, the AMF acknowledges the step 3b by sending an Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer Response message ("N1 SM Message Not Transferred") to SMF and steps 4 to 10 are skipped.
3c.	If the PDU Session Release is initiated by the AMF in step 1c, i.e. the SMF received the Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext Request from the AMF, the SMF responds to the AMF with the Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext response, optionally including the Small Data Rate Control Status and APN Rate Control Status.
	If the UPF included APN Rate Control Status and/or Small Data Rate Control Status in step 2 then the SMF includes APN Rate Control and/or Small Data Rate Control Status and the AMF stores the Small Data Rate Control Status and/or the APN Rate Control Status in the UE context in AMF.
	The AMF and SMF shall remove all contexts (including the PDU Session ID) associated with the PDU Session which are indicated as released at the UE. The SMF shall remove any event subscriptions on the AMF by the SMF that becomes no more needed due to the PDU Session Release. The steps 4 to 11 are skipped.
3d.	If the PDU Session Release is initiated by the AMF in step 1f, i.e. the SMF received the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext Request from the AMF with a release indication to request the release of the PDU Session, the SMF responds to the AMF with the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext Response which may contain the N1 SM container (PDU Session Release Command) to release the PDU session at the UE.
	If the UP connection of the PDU Session is active, the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext Response shall also include the N2 Resource Release request (PDU Session ID) to release the (R)AN resources associated with the PDU Session.
4.	If the UE is in CM-IDLE state and "N1 SM delivery can be skipped" is not indicated, the AMF initiates the network triggered Service Request procedure to transmit the NAS message (PDU Session ID, N1 SM container) to the UE and the steps 6, 7 are skipped.
	If the message received from the SMF in step 3 does not include N2 SM Resource Release request, the AMF transmits the NAS message (PDU Session ID, N1 SM container) to the UE and the steps 6, 7 are skipped.
	If the PDU Session is Control Plane CIoT 5GS Optimisation enabled, the SMF shall not include N2 SM Resource Release request in the message sent to the AMF, the AMF transmits the NAS message (PDU Session ID, N1 SM container) to the UE and the steps 6, 7 are skipped.
	If the UE is in CM-CONNECTED state and the received message from the SMF in step 3 includes N2 SM Resource Release request, the AMF transfers the SM information received from the SMF in step 4 (N2 SM Resource Release request, N1 SM container) to the (R)AN.
	If the message from the SMF includes Small Data Rate Control Status then the AMF stores it in the UE Context in AMF.
5.	When the (R)AN has received an N2 SM request to release the AN resources associated with the PDU Session it issues AN specific signalling exchange(s) with the UE to release the corresponding AN resources.
	In the case of a NG-RAN, the NAS message is sent to the UE in an RRC message which may take place with the UE releasing the NG-RAN resources related to the PDU Session. If NG-RAN resources do not need to be released (i.e. the User Plane of the PDU Session is deactivated), the NAS message is sent to the UE in an RRC message which does not release the NG-RAN resources related to the PDU Session.
	During this procedure, the (R)AN sends any NAS message (N1 SM container (PDU Session Release Command)) received from the AMF in step 4.
	For PDU Session for non-roaming subscribers, if the S-NSSAI of the released PDU Session is subject to network slice usage control as described in clause 5.15.15 of TS 23.501 [2] and there is no other PDU Session using the S-NSSAI over which the Access Type the PDU Session was released, the UE starts slice deregistration inactivity timer for the S-NSSAI over the Access Type if the UE received slice deregistration inactivity timer for the S-NSSAI for that the Access Type.
6.	[Conditional] If the (R)AN had received a N2 SM request to release the AN resources, the (R)AN acknowledges the N2 SM Resource Release Request by sending an N2 SM Resource Release Ack (User Location Information, Secondary RAT usage data) Message to the AMF.
	If the PLMN has configured secondary RAT usage reporting, the NG-RAN node may provide RAN Usage Data Report.
	If NG-RAN/AN-TL has performed the deletion of TN stream based on the request received from the SMF/CUC in step 3, the NG-RAN/AN-TL shall confirm the deletion of TN stream configurations.
7a.	The AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext (N2 SM Resource Release Ack (Secondary RAT usage data), User Location Information) to the SMF.
7b.	The SMF responds to the AMF with an Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext response.
8.	The UE acknowledges the PDU Session Release Command by sending a NAS message (PDU Session ID, N1 SM container (PDU Session Release Ack)) over the (R)AN.
9.	[Conditional] The (R)AN forwards the NAS message from the UE by sending a N2 NAS uplink transport (NAS message (PDU Session ID, N1 SM container (PDU Session Release Ack)), User Location Information) to the AMF.
10a.	The AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext (N1 SM container (PDU Session Release Ack, User Location Information) to the SMF.
10b.	The SMF responds to the AMF with an Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext response.
	Steps 8-10 may happen before steps 6-7.
11.	If steps 3a, 3b or 3d were performed, the SMF waits until it has received replies to the N1 and N2 information provided in step 3, as needed.
	The SMF invokes Nsmf_PDUSession_SMContextStatusNotify to notify AMF that the SM context for this PDU Session is released. If the UPF included Small Data Rate Control Status and/or APN Rate Control Status in step 2 then the SMF includes Small Data Rate Control Status and/or APN Rate Control Status in its request to the AMF in this step. The AMF releases the association between the SMF ID and the PDU Session ID, DNN, as well as S-NSSAI and stores the Small Data Rate Control Status and/or the APN Rate Control Status in the UE context in AMF. The SMF shall remove any event subscriptions on the AMF that becomes no more needed due to the PDU Session Release.
NOTE 6:	The UE and the 5GC will get synchronized about the status of the (released) PDU Session at the next Service Request or Registration procedure.
	For PDU Session for non-roaming subscribers, if the S-NSSAI of the released PDU Session is subject to network slice usage control and if the SMF indicates cause of slice inactivity and there is no other PDU Session using the S-NSSAI over which the Access Type the PDU Session was released, then AMF may remove the S-NSSAI from the Allowed NSSAI or start slice deregistration inactivity timer for the S-NSSAI for that Access Type as described in clause 5.15.15.3 of TS 23.501 [2]. If the AMF did not provide slice deregistration inactivity timer of the S-NSSAI to the UE for the Access Type and S-NSSAI is removed from Allowed NSSAI, the AMF triggers UE Configuration Update procedure to provide the new Allowed NSSAI to the UE.
12.	If Dynamic PCC applied to this session the SMF invokes an SM Policy Association Termination procedure as defined in clause 4.16.6 to delete the PDU Session.
13.	SMF notifies any entity that has subscribed to User Location Information related with PDU Session change.
14.	If it is the last PDU Session the SMF is handling for the UE for the associated (DNN, S-NSSAI), the SMF unsubscribes from Session Management Subscription data changes notification with the UDM by means of the Nudm_SDM_Unsubscribe (SUPI, DNN, S-NSSAI) service operation. The UDM may unsubscribe the subscription notification from UDR by Nudr_DM_Unsubscribe (SUPI, Subscription Data, Session Management Subscription data, DNN, S-NSSAI).
15.	The SMF invokes the Nudm_UECM_Deregistration service operation including the DNN and the PDU Session ID. The UDM removes the association it had stored between the SMF identity and the associated DNN and PDU Session ID. The UDM may update this information by Nudr_DM_Update (SUPI, Subscription Data, UE context in SMF data).
Clause:	Clause 4.16.6	4.16.6	SM Policy Association Termination

Figure 4.16.6-1: SM Policy Association Termination
This procedure concerns both roaming and non-roaming scenarios.
In the non-roaming case the V-PCF is not involved. In the local breakout roaming case, the H-PCF is not involved. In the home routed roaming case, the V-PCF is not involved and the H-PCF interacts only with the H-SMF.
The procedure for Session Management Policy Termination may be initiated by:
-	(Case A) the PCF.
-	(Case B) the SMF.
For local breakout roaming, the interaction with HPLMN (e.g. step 6) is not used. In local breakout roaming, the V-PCF interacts with the UDR of the VPLMN.
1.	(Case A) The PCF may invoke the Npcf_SMPolicyControl_UpdateNotify service operation to request the release of a PDU Session. The SMF acknowledges the request.
	The rest of the procedure corresponds to both Case A &B.
2.	The SMF may invoke the Npcf_SMPolicyControl_Delete service operation to request the deletion of the SM Policy Association with the PCF. The SMF provides relevant information to the PCF.
3.	When receiving the request from step2, the PCF finds the PCC Rules that require an AF to be notified and removes PCC Rules for the PDU Session.
	If the SMF reported accumulated usage for the PDU session in step 1 the PCF deducts the value from the remaining allowed usage for the subscriber, DNN and S-NSSAI in the UDR by invoking Nudr_DM_Update (SUPI, DNN, S-NSSAI, Policy Data, Remaining allowed Usage data, updated data) service operation.
	If the SMF reported accumulated usage for a MK(s) in step 1 the PCF deducts the value from the remaining allowed usage for the MK in the UDR by invoking Nudr_DM_Update (SUPI, DNN, S-NSSAI, Policy Data, Remaining allowed Usage data, updated data (including MK(s))) service operation.
NOTE:	For local breakout roaming, PDU Session policy control subscription information and Remaining allowed usage subscription information for monitoring control as defined in clause 6.2.1.3 of TS 23.503 [20] are not available in V-UDR and V-PCF uses locally configured information according to the roaming agreement with the HPLMN operator.
4.	The SMF removes all policy information about the PDU Session associated with the PDU Session.
5.	The PCF notifies the AF as explained in clause 7.3.1 steps 6-7 of TS 23.203 [24].
	The PCF may invoke Nbsf_Management_Deregister service operation to delete the binding created in BSF.
	The PCF may report that a SM Policy Association is terminated as described in clause 4.16.14.2.
	In the non-roaming case, the PCF may unsubscribe to analytics from NWDAF.
6.	The PCF may invoke the procedure defined in clause 4.16.8 to unsubscribe to policy counter status reporting (If this is the last PDU Session for this subscriber requiring policy counter status reporting) or to modify the subscription to policy counter status reporting, (if any remaining existing PDU Sessions for this subscriber requires policy counter status reporting).
7.	The PCF removes the information related to the terminated PDU Session and acknowledges to the SMF that the PCF handling of the PDU Session has terminated. This interaction is the response to the SMF request in step 2.
8.	Optionally, based on operator policies, as described in clause 6.1.1.4 of TS 23.503 [20], the PCF may store the policy counters and their statuses of spending limits information into the UDR by invoking Nudr_DM_Update.
9.	The PCF may (e.g. if it is the last PDU Session on the (DNN, S-NSSAI) couple) unsubscribe to the notification of the PDU Session related data modification from the UDR by invoking Nudr_DM_Unsubscribe (Subscription Correlation Id) if it had subscribed such notification.
Clause:	Clause 4.2.2.2.2	4.2.2.2.2	General Registration

Figure 4.2.2.2.2-1: Registration procedure
1.	UE to (R)AN: AN message (AN parameters, Registration Request (Registration type, SUCI or 5G-GUTI or PEI, [last visited TAI (if available)], Security parameters, [Requested NSSAI], [Mapping Of Requested NSSAI], [Default Configured NSSAI Indication], [UE Radio Capability Update], [UE MM Core Network Capability], [PDU Session status], [List Of PDU Sessions To Be Activated], [Follow-on request], [MICO Indication], [Requested Active Time], [Requested DRX parameters for E-UTRA and NR], [Requested DRX parameters for NB-IoT], [extended idle mode DRX parameters], [LADN DNN(s) or Indicator Of Requesting LADN Information], [NAS message container], [Support for restriction of use of Enhanced Coverage], [Preferred Network Behaviour], [UE paging probability information], [Paging Subgrouping Support Indication], [LP-WUS Subgrouping Support Indication], [UE Policy Container (the list of PSIs, indication of UE support for ANDSP, the operating system identifier, Indication of URSP Provisioning Support in EPS, UE capability of reporting URSP rule enforcement to network, UE capability of supporting VPLMN-specific URSP rules)] and [UE Radio Capability ID], [Release Request indication], [Paging Restriction Information], PEI, [PLMN with Disaster Condition], [Requested Periodic Update time], [Unavailability Period Duration], [Start of Unavailability Period], [Unavailability Type])).
NOTE 1:	The UE Policy Container and its usage is defined in TS 23.503 [20].
	In the case of NG-RAN, the AN parameters include e.g. 5G-S-TMSI or GUAMI, the Selected PLMN ID (or PLMN ID and NID, see clause 5.30 of TS 23.501 [2]) and NSSAI information, the AN parameters also include Establishment cause. The Establishment cause provides the reason for requesting the establishment of an RRC connection. Whether and how the UE includes the NSSAI information as part of the AN parameters is dependent on the value of the Access Stratum Connection Establishment NSSAI Inclusion Mode parameter, as specified in clause 5.15.9 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The AN parameters shall also include an IAB-Indication if the UE is an IAB-node accessing 5GS.
	The AN parameters shall also include a MBSR Indication if the UE is part of an MBSR node accessing 5GS attempting MBSR operation in the PLMN as specified in clause 5.35A.1 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The Registration type indicates if the UE wants to perform an Initial Registration (i.e. the UE is in RM-DEREGISTERED state), a Mobility Registration Update (i.e. the UE is in RM-REGISTERED state and initiates a Registration procedure due to mobility or due to the UE needs to update its capabilities or protocol parameters, or to request a change of the set of network slices it is allowed to use), a Periodic Registration Update (i.e. the UE is in RM-REGISTERED state and initiates a Registration procedure due to the Periodic Registration Update timer expiry, see clause 4.2.2.2.1), an Emergency Registration (i.e. the UE is in limited service state), a Disaster Roaming Initial Registration, or a Disaster Roaming Mobility Registration Update.
	When the UE is using E-UTRA, the UE indicates its support of CIoT 5GS Optimisations, which is relevant for the AMF selection, in the RRC connection establishment signalling associated with the Registration Request.
	When the UE is performing an Initial Registration or a Disaster Roaming Registration the UE shall indicate its UE identity in the Registration Request message as follows, listed in decreasing order of preference in the case of registration with a PLMN:
i)	a 5G-GUTI mapped from an EPS GUTI, if the UE has a valid EPS GUTI.
ii)	a native 5G-GUTI assigned by the PLMN to which the UE is attempting to register, if available;
iii)	a native 5G-GUTI assigned by an equivalent PLMN to the PLMN to which the UE is attempting to register, if available;
iv)	a native 5G-GUTI assigned by any other PLMN, if available; or
NOTE 2:	This can also be a 5G-GUTIs assigned via another access type.
v)	Otherwise, the UE shall include its SUCI in the Registration Request as defined in TS 33.501 [15].
	If the UE is registering with an SNPN, when the UE is performing an Initial Registration the UE shall indicate its UE identity in the Registration Request message as follows, listed in decreasing order of preference:
i)	a native 5G-GUTI assigned by the same SNPN to which the UE is attempting to register, if available;
ii)	a native 5G-GUTI assigned by an equivalent SNPN to the SNPN to which the UE is attempting to register along with the NID of the SNPN that assigned the 5G-GUTI, if available;
iii)	a native 5G-GUTI assigned by any other SNPN along with the NID of the SNPN that assigned the 5G-GUTI, if available; or
iv)	Otherwise, the UE shall include its SUCI in the Registration Request as defined in TS 33.501 [15].
	When the UE performing an Initial Registration has both a valid EPS GUTI and a native 5G-GUTI, the UE shall also indicate the native 5G-GUTI as Additional GUTI. If more than one native 5G-GUTIs are available, the UE shall select the 5G-GUTI in decreasing order of preference among items (ii)-(iv) in the list above.
	The NAS message container shall be included if the UE is sending a Registration Request message as an Initial NAS message and the UE has a valid 5G NAS security context and the UE needs to send non-cleartext IEs, see clause 4.4.6 of TS 24.501 [25]. If the UE does not need to send non-cleartext IEs, the UE shall send a Registration Request message without including the NAS message container.
	If the UE does not have a valid 5G NAS security context, the UE shall send the Registration Request message without including the NAS message container. The UE shall include the entire Registration Request message (i.e. containing cleartext IEs and non-cleartext IEs) in the NAS message container that is sent as part of the Security Mode Complete message in step 9b.
	When the UE is performing an Initial Registration (i.e. the UE is in RM-DEREGISTERED state) with a native 5G-GUTI then the UE shall indicate the related GUAMI information in the AN parameters. When the UE is performing an Initial Registration with its SUCI, the UE shall not indicate any GUAMI information in the AN parameters.
	When the UE is performing an Initial Registration or a Mobility Registration and if CIoT 5GS Optimisations are supported the UE shall indicate its Preferred Network Behaviour (see clause 5.31.2 of TS 23.501 [2]). If S1 mode is supported the UE's EPC Preferred Network Behaviour is included in the S1 UE network capabilities in the Registration Request message, see clause 8.2.6.1 of TS 24.501 [25].
	For an Emergency Registration, the SUCI shall be included if the UE does not have a valid 5G-GUTI available; the PEI shall be included when the UE has no SUPI and no valid 5G-GUTI. In other cases, the 5G-GUTI is included and it indicates the last serving AMF.
	The UE may provide the UE's usage setting based on its configuration as defined in clause 5.16.3.7 of TS 23.501 [2]. The UE provides Requested NSSAI (as described in clause 5.15.5.2.1 of TS 23.501 [2] and if the UE supports the subscription-based restrictions to simultaneous registration of network slices, also taking into account the NSSRG Information constraints as described in clause 5.15.12 of TS 23.501 [2] and in the case of Initial Registration or Mobility Registration Update, the UE includes the Mapping Of Requested NSSAI (if available), which is the mapping of each S-NSSAI of the Requested NSSAI to the HPLMN S-NSSAIs, to ensure that the network is able to verify whether the S-NSSAI(s) in the Requested NSSAI are permitted based on the Subscribed S-NSSAIs. If the Network Slice Replacement is used and the UE is configured with Mapping Of Alternative NSSAI, the Requested NSSAI may include Alternative S-NSSAI(s). If the AMF determines that S-NSSAI(s) that the UE requests are not Alternative S-NSSAI(s) in the UE context and not Subscribed S-NSSAIs, the AMF determines to update the UE configuration as described in clause 5.15.19 of TS 23.501 [2]. In the case of inter PLMN mobility, if the serving PLMN S-NSSAI(s) corresponding to the established PDU Session(s) are not present in the UE, the associated HPLMN S-NSSAI(s) associated with the established PDU Session(s) shall be provided in the Mapping Of Requested NSSAI as described in clause 5.15.5.2.1 TS 23.501 [2]. If the UEs supports reconnection to the network due to RAN timing synchronization status change as described in TS 23.501 [2], the UE indicates the support of this capability to the network. If the UE supports UE configuration of network-controlled Slice Usage Policy and the UE stores Slice Usage Policy, the UE shall include an on demand S-NSSAI in the Requested NSSAI only when applications in the UE require data transmission by a PDU session associated with the on demand S-NSSAI as described in clause 5.15.15 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The UE includes the Default Configured NSSAI Indication if the UE is using a Default Configured NSSAI, as defined in TS 23.501 [2].
	The UE may include UE paging probability information if it supports the assignment of WUS Assistance Information, AMF PEIPS Assistance Information from the AMF or AMF LP-WUSPS Assistance Information from AMF (see TS 23.501 [2]).
	The UE may include Paging Subgrouping Support Indication or LP-WUS Subgrouping Support Indication as defined in TS 23.501 [2].
	In the case of Mobility Registration Update, the UE includes in the List Of PDU Sessions To Be Activated the PDU Sessions for which there are pending uplink data. When the UE includes the List Of PDU Sessions To Be Activated, the UE shall indicate PDU Sessions only associated with the access the Registration Request is related to. As defined in TS 24.501 [25] the UE shall include always-on PDU Sessions which are accepted by the network in the List Of PDU Sessions To Be Activated even if there are no pending uplink data for those PDU Sessions.
NOTE 3:	A PDU Session corresponding to a LADN is not included in the List Of PDU Sessions To Be Activated when the UE is outside the area of availability of the LADN.
	The UE MM Core Network Capability is provided by the UE and handled by AMF as defined in clause 5.4.4a of TS 23.501 [2]. The UE includes in the UE MM Core Network Capability an indication if it supports Request Type flag "handover" for PDN connectivity request during the attach procedure as defined in clause 5.17.2.3.1 of TS 23.501 [2]. If the UE supports 'Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication', the UE indicates its capability of 'Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication' in the MICO Indication. If the UE supports CAG, the UE indicates its capability of "CAG supported" in the UE MM Core Network Capability. If the UE operating two or more USIMs, supports and intends to use one or more Multi-USIM feature(s), the UE indicates one or more Multi-USIM specific features described in clause 5.38 of TS 23.501 [2] in the UE MM Core Network Capability. If the UE supports equivalent SNPNs, the UE indicates its capability of "equivalent SNPNs" in the UE MM Core Network Capability. If the UE supports Unavailability Period, the UE indicates its capability of "Unavailability Period Support" in the UE MM Core Network Capability. If the UE supports LADN per DNN and S-NSSAI, the UE indicates its support of LADN per DNN and S-NSSAI in the UE MM Core Network Capability. If the UE supports the Network Slice Replacement feature, the UE indicates support for Network Slice Replacement feature as described in clause 5.15.19 of TS 23.501 [2]. If the UE supports UE configuration of network-controlled Slice Usage Policy, the UE indicates its capability of "UE Configuration of network-controlled Slice Usage Policy" in the UE MM Core Network Capability as described in clause 5.15.15 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The UE may provide either the LADN DNN(s) or an Indication Of Requesting LADN Information as described in clause 5.6.5 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If available, the last visited TAI shall be included in order to help the AMF produce Registration Area for the UE.
NOTE 4:	With NR satellite access, the last visited TAI is determined as specified in clause 5.4.11.6 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The Security parameters are used for Authentication and integrity protection, see TS 33.501 [15]. Requested NSSAI indicates the Network Slice Selection Assistance Information (as defined in clause 5.15 of TS 23.501 [2]). The PDU Session status indicates the previously established PDU Sessions in the UE. When the UE is connected to the two AMFs belonging to different PLMN via 3GPP access and non-3GPP access then the PDU Session status indicates the established PDU Session of the current PLMN in the UE.
	The Follow-on request is included when the UE has pending uplink signalling and the UE doesn't include List Of PDU Sessions To Be Activated, or the Registration type indicates the UE wants to perform an Emergency Registration. In Initial Registration and Mobility Registration Update, UE provides the UE Requested DRX parameters, as defined in clause 5.4.5 of TS 23.501 [2]. The UE may provide the extended idle mode DRX parameters as defined in clause 5.31.7.2 of TS 23.501 [2] to request extended idle mode DRX.
	The UE provides UE Radio Capability Update indication as described in TS 23.501 [2].
	The UE includes the MICO Indication and optionally a Requested Active Time value and Requested Periodic Update time value if the UE wants to use MICO Mode with Active Time.
	For a UE using NR satellite access that provides discontinuous coverage or an event is triggered in the UE that would make the UE unavailable for a certain period of time, the UE may include an Unavailability Type, an Unavailability Period Duration and/or Start of Unavailability Period as described in clause 5.4.13.1 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The UE may indicate its Service Gap Control Capability in the UE MM Core Network Capability, see clause 5.31.16 of TS 23.501 [2].
	For a UE with a running Service Gap timer in the UE, the UE shall not set Follow-on Request indication or Uplink data status in the Registration Request message (see clause 5.31.16 of TS 23.501 [2]), except for network access for regulatory prioritized services like Emergency services or exception reporting.
	If UE supports RACS and has been assigned UE Radio Capability ID(s), the UE shall indicate a UE Radio Capability ID as defined in clause 5.4.4.1a of TS 23.501 [2] as non-cleartext IE.
	The PEI may be retrieved in initial registration from the UE as described in clause 4.2.2.2.1.
	If a UE supports the subscription-based restrictions to simultaneous registration of network slices feature, it includes the NSSRG handling support indication in the UE 5GMM Core Network Capability according to clause 5.15.12 of TS 23.501 [2]. The AMF stores whether the UE supports this feature in the UE context.
	If a UE supports the temporary available network slices feature, it includes the indication of support for temporary available network slices in the UE 5GMM Network Capability according to clause 5.15.16 of TS 23.501 [2].
	When a Multi-USIM UE wants to enter CM-IDLE state immediately e.g. after having performed mobility or periodic registration, it includes the Release Request indication and optionally provides Paging Restriction Information.
	When the UE is performing a Disaster Roaming Registration, the UE may indicate the PLMN with Disaster Condition for the cases as defined in TS 24.501 [25].
2.	If a 5G-S-TMSI or GUAMI is not included or the 5G-S-TMSI or GUAMI does not indicate a valid AMF the (R)AN, based on (R)AT and Requested NSSAI, if available, selects an AMF
	The (R)AN selects an AMF as described in clause 6.3.5 of TS 23.501 [2]. If UE is in CM-CONNECTED state, the (R)AN can forward the Registration Request message to the AMF based on the N2 connection of the UE.
	If the (R)AN cannot select an appropriate AMF, it forwards the Registration Request to an AMF which has been configured, in (R)AN, to perform AMF selection.
3.	(R)AN to new AMF: N2 message (N2 parameters, Registration Request (as described in step 1) and [LTE-M Indication].
	When NG-RAN is used, the N2 parameters include the Selected PLMN ID (or PLMN ID and NID, see clause 5.30 of TS 23.501 [2]), Location Information and Cell Identity related to the cell in which the UE is camping, UE Context Request which indicates that a UE context including security information needs to be setup at the NG-RAN.
	When NG-RAN is used, the N2 parameters shall also include the Establishment cause and IAB-Indication or MBSR Indication if the indication is received in AN parameters in step 1.
	Mapping Of Requested NSSAI is provided only if available.
	If the Registration type indicated by the UE is Periodic Registration Update, then steps 4 to 19 may be omitted.
	When the Establishment cause is associated with priority services (e.g. MPS, MCS), the AMF includes a Message Priority header to indicate priority information. Other NFs relay the priority information by including the Message Priority header in service-based interfaces, as specified in TS 29.500 [17].
	The RAT Type the UE is using is determined (see clause 4.2.2.2.1) and based on it the AMF determines whether the UE is performing Inter-RAT mobility to or from NB-IoT. If the AMF receives the LTE M indication, then it considers that the RAT Type is LTE-M and stores the LTE-M Indication in UE Context.
	If a UE includes a Preferred Network Behaviour, this defines the Network Behaviour the UE supports and is expecting to be available in the network as defined in clause 5.31.2 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the UE has included the Preferred Network Behaviour and what the UE indicated it supports in Preferred Network Behaviour is incompatible with the network support, the AMF shall reject the Registration Request with an appropriate cause value (e.g. one that avoids retries on this PLMN).
	If there is a Service Gap timer running in the UE Context in AMF for the UE and Follow-on Request indication or Uplink data status is included in the Registration Request message, the AMF shall ignore the Follow-on Request indication and Uplink data status and not perform any of the actions related to the status.
	If the UE has included a UE Radio Capability ID in step 1 and the AMF supports RACS, the AMF stores the Radio Capability ID in UE context.
	For NR satellite access, the AMF may verify the UE location and determine whether the PLMN is allowed to operate at the UE location, as described in clause 5.4.11.4 of TS 23.501 [2]. If the UE receives a Registration Reject message with cause value indicating that the PLMN is not allowed to operate at the present UE location, the UE shall attempt to select a PLMN as specified in TS 23.122 [22].
	For a Disaster Roaming Registration, based on the ULI (including Cell ID) received from the NG-RAN, the PLMN with Disaster Condition derived from the UE's 5G-GUTI, derived from the UE's SUCI or indicated by the UE and the local configuration, the AMF determines if Disaster Roaming service can be provided. If the current location is not subject to Disaster Roaming service or the Disaster Roaming service is not provided to the PLMN with Disaster Condition derived from the UE's 5G-GUTI, derived from the UE's SUCI or indicated by UE, then the AMF should reject the Registration Request indicating a suitable Cause value.
4.	[Conditional] new AMF to old AMF: Namf_Communication_UEContextTransfer (complete Registration Request) or new AMF to UDSF: Nudsf_Unstructured Data Management_Query().
	The new AMF determines the old AMF using the UE's 5G-GUTI. If the new AMF received an NID in the Registration request, it determines that the 5G-GUTI was assigned by an SNPN and determines the old AMF using the 5G-GUTI and NID of the SNPN.
	(With UDSF Deployment): If the UE's 5G-GUTI was included in the Registration Request and the serving AMF has changed since last Registration procedure, new AMF and old AMF are in the same AMF Set and UDSF is deployed, the new AMF retrieves the stored UE's SUPI and UE context directly from the UDSF using Nudsf_UnstructuredDataManagement_Query service operation or they can share stored UE context via implementation specific means if UDSF is not deployed. This includes also event subscription information by each NF consumer for the given UE. In this case, the new AMF uses integrity protected complete Registration request NAS message to perform and verify integrity protection.
	(Without UDSF Deployment): If the UE's 5G-GUTI was included in the Registration Request and the serving AMF has changed since last Registration procedure, the new AMF may invoke the Namf_Communication_UEContextTransfer service operation on the old AMF including the complete Registration Request NAS message, which may be integrity protected, as well as the Access Type, to request the UE's SUPI and UE Context. See clause 5.2.2.2.2 for details of this service operation. In this case, the old AMF uses either 5G-GUTI and the integrity protected complete Registration request NAS message, or the SUPI and an indication that the UE is validated from the new AMF, to verify integrity protection if the context transfer service operation invocation corresponds to the UE requested. The old AMF also transfers the event subscriptions information by each NF consumer, for the UE, to the new AMF. If the old AMF has not yet reported a non-zero MO Exception Data Counter to the (H-)SMF, the Context Response also includes the MO Exception Data Counter.
	If the old AMF has PDU Sessions for another access type (different from the Access Type indicated in this step) and if the old AMF determines that there is no possibility for relocating the N2 interface to the new AMF, the old AMF returns UE's SUPI and indicates that the Registration Request has been validated for integrity protection, but does not include the rest of the UE context.
	For inter PLMN mobility, UE Context information includes HPLMN S-NSSAIs corresponding to the Allowed NSSAI for each Access Type and Partially Allowed NSSAI, without Allowed NSSAI and Partially Allowed NSSAI of old PLMN.
NOTE 5:	The new AMF Sets the indication that the UE is validated according to step 9a, if the new AMF has performed successful UE authentication after previous integrity check failure in the old AMF.
NOTE 6:	The NF consumers do not need to subscribe for the events once again with the new AMF after the UE is successfully registered with the new AMF.
	If the new AMF has already received UE contexts from the old AMF during handover procedure, then step 4,5 and 10 shall be skipped.
	For an Emergency Registration, if the UE identifies itself with a 5G-GUTI that is not known to the AMF, steps 4 and 5 are skipped and the AMF immediately requests the SUPI from the UE. If the UE identifies itself with PEI, the SUPI request shall be skipped. Allowing Emergency Registration without a user identity is dependent on local regulations.
5.	[Conditional] old AMF to new AMF: Response to Namf_Communication_UEContextTransfer (SUPI, UE Context in AMF (as per Table 5.2.2.2.2-1)) or UDSF to new AMF: Nudsf_Unstructured Data Management_Query(). The old AMF may start an implementation specific (guard) timer for the UE context.
	If the UDSF was queried in step 4, the UDSF responds to the new AMF for the Nudsf_Unstructured Data Management_Query invocation with the related contexts including established PDU Sessions, the old AMF includes SMF information DNN, S-NSSAI(s) and PDU Session ID, active NGAP UE-TNLA bindings to N3IWF/TNGF/W-AGF, the old AMF includes information about the NGAP UE-TNLA bindings. If the Old AMF was queried in step 4, Old AMF responds to the new AMF for the Namf_Communication_UEContextTransfer invocation by including the UE's SUPI and UE Context.
	If old AMF holds information about established PDU Session(s) and it is not an Initial Registration, the old AMF includes SMF information, DNN(s), S-NSSAI(s) and PDU Session ID(s).
	If old AMF holds UE context established via N3IWF, W-AGF or TNGF, the old AMF includes the CM state via N3IWF, W-AGF or TNGF. If the UE is in CM-CONNECTED state via N3IWF, W-AGF or TNGF, the old AMF includes information about the NGAP UE-TNLA bindings.
	If old AMF fails the integrity check of the Registration Request NAS message, the old AMF shall indicate the integrity check failure. If the new AMF is configured to allow emergency services for unauthenticated UE, the new AMF behaves as follows:
-	If the UE has only an emergency PDU Session, the AMF either skips the authentication and security procedure or accepts that the authentication may fail and continues the Mobility Registration Update procedure; or
-	If the UE has both emergency and non emergency PDU Sessions and authentication fails, the AMF continues the Mobility Registration Update procedure and deactivates all the non-emergency PDU Sessions as specified in clause 4.3.4.2.
NOTE 7:	The new AMF can determine if a PDU Session is used for emergency service by checking whether the DNN matches the emergency DNN.
	If old AMF holds information about AM Policy Association and the information about UE Policy Association (i.e. the Policy Control Request Trigger for updating UE Policy as defined in TS 23.503 [20]), the old AMF includes the information about the AM Policy Association, the UE Policy Association and PCF ID. In the roaming case, V-PCF ID and H-PCF ID are included.
	If old AMF was a consumer of UE related NWDAF services, the old AMF includes information about active analytics subscriptions, i.e. the Subscription Correlation ID, NWDAF identifier (i.e. Instance ID or Set ID), Analytics ID(s) and associated Analytics specific data in the Namf_Communication_UEContextTransfer response. Usage of the analytics information by the new AMF is specified in TS 23.288 [50].
	During inter PLMN mobility, the handling of the UE Radio Capability ID in the new AMF is as defined in TS 23.501 [2].
NOTE 8:	When new AMF uses UDSF for context retrieval, interactions between old AMF, new AMF and UDSF due to UE signalling on old AMF at the same time is implementation issue.
6.	[Conditional] new AMF to UE: Identity Request ().
	If the SUCI is not provided by the UE nor retrieved from the old AMF the Identity Request procedure is initiated by AMF sending an Identity Request message to the UE requesting the SUCI.
7.	[Conditional] UE to new AMF: Identity Response ().
	The UE responds with an Identity Response message including the SUCI. The UE derives the SUCI by using the provisioned public key of the HPLMN, as specified in TS 33.501 [15].
8.	The AMF may decide to initiate UE authentication by invoking an AUSF. In that case, the AMF selects an AUSF based on SUPI or SUCI, as described in clause 6.3.4 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the AMF is configured to support Emergency Registration for unauthenticated SUPIs and the UE indicated Registration type Emergency Registration, the AMF skips the authentication or the AMF accepts that the authentication may fail and continues the Registration procedure.
9a.	If authentication is required, the AMF requests it from the AUSF; if Tracing Requirements about the UE are available at the AMF, the AMF provides Tracing Requirements in its request to AUSF. For a Disaster Roaming Registration, the AMF may provide the indication of Disaster Roaming service in its request to AUSF. Upon request from the AMF, the AUSF shall execute authentication of the UE. The authentication is performed as described in TS 33.501 [15]. The AUSF selects a UDM as described in clause 6.3.8 of TS 23.501 [2] and gets the authentication data from UDM.
	The AUSF may provide the indication of Disaster Roaming service to UDM if the indication is received from AMF. For a Disaster Roaming Registration, the AUSF executes authentication of the UE based on the local policy and/or local configuration as specified in clause 5.40.4 of TS 23.501 [2] and in TS 33.501 [15].
	Once the UE has been authenticated the AUSF provides relevant security related information to the AMF. If the AMF provided a SUCI to AUSF, the AUSF shall return the SUPI to AMF only after the authentication is successful.
	After successful authentication in new AMF, which is triggered by the integrity check failure in old AMF at step 5, the new AMF invokes step 4 above again and indicates that the UE is validated (i.e. through the reason parameter as specified in clause 5.2.2.2.2).
9b	If NAS security context does not exist, the NAS security initiation is performed as described in TS 33.501 [15]. If the UE had no NAS security context in step 1, the UE includes the full Registration Request message as defined in TS 24.501 [25].
	The AMF decides if the Registration Request needs to be rerouted as described in clause 4.2.2.2.3, where the initial AMF refers to the AMF.
9c.	The AMF initiates NGAP procedure to provide the 5G-AN with security context as specified in TS 38.413 [10] if the 5G-AN had requested for UE Context. Also, if the AMF decides that EPS fallback is supported (e.g. based on UE capability to support Request Type flag "handover" for PDN connectivity request during the attach procedure as defined in clause 5.17.2.3.1 of TS 23.501 [2], subscription data and local policy), the AMF shall send an indication "Redirection for EPS fallback for voice is possible" towards 5G-AN as specified in TS 38.413 [10]. Otherwise, the AMF indicates "Redirection for EPS fallback for voice is not possible". In addition, if Tracing Requirements about the UE are available at the AMF, the AMF provides the 5G-AN with Tracing Requirements in the NGAP procedure. If QMC Configuration information is available at the AMF, the AMF provides the 5G-AN with QMC Configuration information in the NGAP procedure.
9d.	The 5G-AN stores the security context and acknowledges to the AMF. The 5G-AN uses the security context to protect the messages exchanged with the UE as described in TS 33.501 [15].
10.	[Conditional] new AMF to old AMF: Namf_Communication_RegistrationStatusUpdate (PDU Session ID(s) to be released e.g. due to slice not supported).
	If the AMF has changed the new AMF informs the old AMF that the registration of the UE in the new AMF is completed by invoking the Namf_Communication_RegistrationStatusUpdate service operation.
	If the authentication/security procedure fails, then the Registration shall be rejected and the new AMF invokes the Namf_Communication_RegistrationStatusUpdate service operation with a reject indication towards the old AMF. The old AMF continues as if the UE context transfer service operation was never received.
	The new AMF determines the PDU Session(s) that cannot be supported in the new Registration Area in the cases below:
-	If one or more of the S-NSSAIs used in the old Registration Area cannot be served in the target Registration Area.
-	When continuity of the PDU Session(s) cannot be supported between networks (e.g. SNPN-SNPN mobility, inter-PLMN mobility where no HR agreement exists).
	If any of the cases is met, the new AMF invokes the Namf_Communication_RegistrationStatusUpdate service operation including the rejected PDU Session ID towards the old AMF. Then the new AMF modifies the PDU Session Status correspondingly. The old AMF informs the corresponding SMF(s) to locally release the UE's SM context by invoking the Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext service operation.
	If new AMF received in the UE context transfer in step 5 the information about the AM Policy Association and the UE Policy Association and decides, based on local policies, not to use the PCF(s) identified by the PCF ID(s) for the AM Policy Association and the UE Policy Association, then it will inform the old AMF that the AM Policy Association and the UE Policy Association in the UE context is not used any longer and then the PCF selection is performed in step 15.
	If the new AMF received in the UE context transfer in step 5 the information about UE related analytics subscription(s), the new AMF may take over the analytics subscription(s) from the old AMF. Otherwise, if the new AMF instead determines to create new analytics subscription(s), it informs the old AMF about the analytics subscriptions (identified by their Subscription Correlation ID) that are not needed any longer and the old AMF may now unsubscribe those NWDAF analytics subscriptions for the UE according to TS 23.288 [50].
11.	[Conditional] new AMF to UE: Identity Request/Response (PEI).
	If the PEI was not provided by the UE nor retrieved from the old AMF the Identity Request procedure is initiated by AMF sending an Identity Request message to the UE to retrieve the PEI. The PEI shall be transferred encrypted unless the UE performs Emergency Registration and cannot be authenticated.
	For an Emergency Registration, the UE may have included the PEI in the Registration Request. If so, the PEI retrieval is skipped.
	If the UE supports RACS as indicated in UE MM Core Network Capability, the AMF shall use the PEI of the UE to obtain the IMEI/TAC for the purpose of RACS operation.
12.	Optionally the new AMF initiates ME identity check by invoking the N5g-eir_EquipmentIdentityCheck_Get service operation (see clause 5.2.4.2.2).
	The PEI check is performed as described in clause 4.7.
	For an Emergency Registration, if the PEI is blocked, operator policies determine whether the Emergency Registration procedure continues or is stopped.
13.	If step 14 is to be performed, the new AMF, based on the SUPI, selects a UDM, then UDM may select a UDR instance. See clause 6.3.9 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The AMF selects a UDM as described in clause 6.3.8 of TS 23.501 [2].
14a-c.	If the AMF has changed since the last Registration procedure, if UE Registration type is Initial Registration or Emergency Registration, or if the UE provides a SUPI which does not refer to a valid context in the AMF, or if the UE registers to the same AMF it has already registered to a non-3GPP access (i.e. the UE is registered over a non-3GPP access and initiates this Registration procedure to add a 3GPP access), the new AMF registers with the UDM using Nudm_UECM_Registration for the access to be registered (and subscribes to be notified when the UDM deregisters this AMF). The UDM based on the "Registration Type" in the Nudm_UECM_Registration request, can act on SoR information according to TS 23.122 [22]. In this case, if the AMF does not have event exposure subscription information for this UE, the AMF indicates it to UDM. Then, if the UDM has existing applicable event exposure subscriptions for events detected in AMF for this UE or for any of the groups this UE belongs to (possibly retrieved from UDR), UDM invokes the Namf_EventExposure_Subscribe service for recreating the event exposure subscriptions.
	The AMF provides the "Homogenous Support of IMS Voice over PS Sessions" indication (see clause 5.16.3.3 of TS 23.501 [2]) to the UDM. The "Homogenous Support of IMS Voice over PS Sessions" indication shall not be included unless the AMF has completed its evaluation of the support of "IMS Voice over PS Session" as specified in clause 5.16.3.2 of TS 23.501 [2].
	During initial Registration, if the AMF and UE supports SRVCC from NG-RAN to UTRAN the AMF provides UDM with the UE SRVCC capability.
	If the AMF determines that only the UE SRVCC capability has changed, the AMF sends UE SRVCC capability to the UDM.
NOTE 9:	At this step, it is possible that the AMF does not have all the information needed to determine the setting of the IMS Voice over PS Session Supported indication for this UE (see clause 5.16.3.2 of TS 23.501 [2]). Hence the AMF can send the "Homogenous Support of IMS Voice over PS Sessions" later on in this procedure.
	After AMF has successfully completed the Nudm_UECM_Registration operation and if the AMF does not have subscription data for the UE, the AMF retrieves the Access and Mobility Subscription data, SMF Selection Subscription data, UE context in SMF data and LCS mobile origination using Nudm_SDM_Get. If the AMF already has subscription data for the UE but the SoR Update Indicator in the UE context requires the AMF to retrieve SoR information depending on the NAS Registration Type ("Initial Registration" or "Emergency Registration") (see Annex C of TS 23.122 [22]), the AMF retrieves the Steering of Roaming information using Nudm_SDM_Get. This requires that UDM may retrieve this information from UDR by Nudr_DM_Query. After a successful response is received, the AMF subscribes to be notified using Nudm_SDM_Subscribe when the data requested is modified, UDM may subscribe to UDR by Nudr_DM_Subscribe. The GPSI is provided to the AMF in the Access and Mobility Subscription data from the UDM if the GPSI is available in the UE subscription data. The UDM may provide indication that the subscription data for network slicing is updated for the UE. If the UE is subscribed to MPS in the serving PLMN, "MPS priority" (and optionally, the MPS priority for Messaging indication if it is set (enabled) in the UDM) is included in the Access and Mobility Subscription data provided to the AMF. If the UE is subscribed to MCX in the serving PLMN, "MCX priority" is included in the Access and Mobility Subscription data provided to the AMF. The UDM also provides the IAB-Operation allowed indication or MBSR Operation allowed indication to AMF as part of the Access and Mobility Subscription data. The AMF shall trigger the setup of the UE context in NG-RAN, or modification of the UE context in NG-RAN if the initial setup is at step 9c, including an indication that the IAB-node is authorized or MBSR is authorized. If a S-NSSAI in the Subscribed S-NSSAIs is subject to network slice usage control and the S-NSSAI is dedicated to a single AF, the UDM may provide a Slice Usage Policy information including whether a network slice is on demand and a slice deregistration inactivity timer value for the Subscribed S-NSSAIs as described in clause 5.15.15 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The UDM may provide the NCR-Operation allowed indication to AMF as part of the Access and Mobility Subscription data. The AMF shall trigger the setup of the UE context in NG-RAN, or modification of the UE context in NG-RAN if the initial setup is at step 9c, including an indication of NCR-MT authorization information.
	For a Disaster Roaming Registration, the AMF may provide the indication of Disaster Roaming service to the UDM. The UDM provides the subscription data for a Disaster Roaming service to the AMF based on the local policy and/or the local configuration as specified in clause 5.40.4 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The AMF provides MINT support indication via Nudm_UECM_Registration towards UDM, if UE includes the MINT support indication in the 5GMM capability as specified in clause 5.40.2 of TS 23.501 [2] or if the MINT support indication in the 5GMM capability is changed.
	If the AMF receives a priority indication (e.g. MPS, MCX) as part of the Access and Mobility Subscription data, but the UE did not provide an Establishment cause associated with priority services, the AMF shall include a Message Priority header to indicate priority information for all subsequent messages. (including messages related to SMS delivery as specified in clause 4.13 if the MPS for Messaging indication is included in subscription data) Other NFs relay the priority information by including the Message Priority header in service-based interfaces, as specified in TS 29.500 [17].
	The new AMF provides the Access Type it serves for the UE to the UDM and the Access Type is set to "3GPP access". The UDM stores the associated Access Type together with the serving AMF and does not remove the AMF identity associated to the other Access Type if any. The UDM may store in UDR information provided at the AMF registration by Nudr_DM_Update.
	If the UE was registered in the old AMF for an access and the old and the new AMFs are in the same PLMN, the new AMF sends a separate/independent Nudm_UECM_Registration to update UDM with Access Type set to access used in the old AMF, after the old AMF relocation is successfully completed.
	The new AMF creates an UE context for the UE after getting the Access and Mobility Subscription data from the UDM. The Access and Mobility Subscription data includes whether the UE is allowed to include NSSAI in the 3GPP access RRC Connection Establishment in clear text. The Access and Mobility Subscription data may include Enhanced Coverage Restricted information. If received from the UDM and the UE included support for restriction of use of Enhanced Coverage in step 1, the AMF determines whether Enhanced Coverage is restricted or not for the UE as specified in clause 5.31.12 of TS 23.501 [2] and stores the updated Enhanced Coverage Restricted information in the UE context.
	The Access and Mobility Subscription data may include the NB-IoT UE Priority. For subscribed S-NSSAIs subject to NSAC, the AMF stores the corresponding applicable NSAC admission mode.
	The subscription data may contain Service Gap Time parameter. If received from the UDM, the AMF stores this Service Gap Time in the UE Context in AMF for the UE.
	The subscription data may contain an Energy Saving Indicator defined in clause 5.51.5 of TS 23.501 [2]. If received from the UDM, the AMF stores the Energy Saving Indicator in the UE Context.
	If the AMF has the LADN service area and UE indication of support for LADN per DNN and S-NSSAI, the AMF applies LADN per DNN and S-NSSAI as described in 5.20b.2 of TS 23.501 [2].
	For an Emergency Registration in which the UE was not successfully authenticated, the AMF shall not register with the UDM.
	The AMF enforces the Mobility Restrictions as specified in clause 5.3.4.1.1 of TS 23.501 [2]. For an Emergency Registration, the AMF shall not check for Mobility Restrictions, access restrictions, regional restrictions or subscription restrictions. For an Emergency Registration, the AMF shall ignore any unsuccessful registration response from UDM and continue with the Registration procedure.
NOTE 10:	The AMF can, instead of the Nudm_SDM_Get service operation, use the Nudm_SDM_Subscribe service operation with an Immediate Report Indication that triggers the UDM to immediately return the subscribed data if the corresponding feature is supported by both the AMF and the UDM.
14d.	When the UDM stores the associated Access Type (e.g. 3GPP) together with the serving AMF as indicated in step 14a, it will cause the UDM to initiate a Nudm_UECM_DeregistrationNotification (see clause 5.2.3.2.2) to the old AMF corresponding to the same (e.g. 3GPP) access, if one exists. If the timer started in step 5 is not running, the old AMF may remove the UE context for the same Access Type. Otherwise, the AMF may remove UE context for the same Access Type when the timer expires. If the serving NF removal reason indicated by the UDM is Initial Registration, then, as described in clause 4.2.2.3.2, the old AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext (SM Context ID) service operation towards all the associated SMF(s) of the UE to notify that the UE is deregistered from old AMF for the same Access Type. The SMF(s) shall release the PDU Session on getting this notification.
	If the old AMF has established an AM Policy Association and a UE Policy Association with the PCF(s) and the old AMF did not transfer the PCF ID(s) to the new AMF (e.g. new AMF is in different PLMN), the old AMF performs an AMF-initiated Policy Association Termination procedure, as defined in clause 4.16.3.2 and performs an AMF-initiated UE Policy Association Termination procedure, as defined in clause 4.16.13.1. In addition, if the old AMF transferred the PCF ID(s) in the UE context but the new AMF informed in step 10 that the AM Policy Association information and UE Policy Association information in the UE context will not be used then the old AMF performs an AMF-initiated Policy Association Termination procedure, as defined in clause 4.16.3.2 and performs an AMF-initiated UE Policy Association Termination procedure, as defined in clause 4.16.13.1.
	If the old AMF has an N2 connection for that UE (e.g. because the UE was in RRC_INACTIVE state but has now moved to E-UTRAN or moved to an area not served by the old AMF), the old AMF shall perform AN Release (see clause 4.2.6) with a cause value that indicates that the UE has already locally released the NG-RAN's RRC Connection.
	If the UE context in the old AMF contains an Allowed NSSAI or Partially Allowed NSSAI including one or more S-NSSAI(s) subject to NSAC, the old AMF upon receipt of the Nudm_UECM_DeregistrationNotification from the UDM, sends an update request message for each S-NSSAI subject to NSAC to the corresponding NSACF(s) with update flag parameter set to decrease (see clause 4.2.11.2).
	At the end of registration procedure, the AMF may initiate synchronization of event exposure subscriptions with the UDM if the AMF does not indicate unavailability of event exposure subscription in step 14a.
NOTE 11:	The AMF can initiate synchronization with UDM even if events are available in the UE context (e.g. as received from old AMF) at any given time and based on local policy. This can be done during subscription change related event.
14e.	[Conditional] If old AMF does not have UE context for another access type (i.e. non-3GPP access), the Old AMF unsubscribes with the UDM for subscription data using Nudm_SDM_unsubscribe.
15.	If the AMF decides to initiate PCF communication, the AMF acts as follows.
	If the new AMF decides to use the (V-)PCF identified by the (V-)PCF ID included in UE context from the old AMF in step 5, the AMF contacts the (V-)PCF identified by the (V-)PCF ID to obtain policy. If the AMF decides to perform PCF discovery and selection and the AMF selects a (V)-PCF and may select an H-PCF (for roaming scenario) as described in clause 6.3.7.1 of TS 23.501 [2] and according to the V-NRF to H-NRF interaction described in clause 4.3.2.2.3.3.
	As described in clause 6.3.7.1 of TS 23.501 [2], if the AMF receives PCF Selection Assistance info from the UDM, the AMF checks if a list of DNN, S-NSSAI combinations are provided in the PCF Selection Assistance Info then the AMF checks local configuration to determine which DNN, S-NSSAI to use then selects the PCF ID included in the corresponding UE Context in the SMF data. If no PCF ID is received, the AMF select the PCF by considering other criteria, defined in clause 6.3.7.1 of TS 23.501 [2].
16.	[Optional] new AMF performs an AM Policy Association Establishment/Modification. For an Emergency Registration, this step is skipped.
	If the new AMF selects a new (V-)PCF in step 15, the new AMF performs AM Policy Association Establishment with the selected (V-)PCF as defined in clause 4.16.1.2.
	If the (V-)PCF identified by the (V-)PCF ID included in UE context from the old AMF is used, the new AMF performs AM Policy Association Modification with the (V-)PCF as defined in clause 4.16.2.1.2.
	If the AMF notifies the Mobility Restrictions (e.g. UE location) to the PCF for adjustment, or if the PCF updates the Mobility Restrictions itself due to some conditions (e.g. application in use, time and date), the PCF shall provide the updated Mobility Restrictions to the AMF. If the subscription information includes Tracing Requirements, the AMF provides the PCF with Tracing Requirements.
	If the AMF supports DNN replacement, the AMF provides the PCF with the Allowed NSSAI and Partially Allowed NSSAI and if available, the Mapping Of Allowed NSSAI and Mapping Of Partially Allowed NSSAI.
	If the PCF supports DNN replacement, the PCF provides the AMF with triggers for DNN replacement.
	If the PCF supports the slice replacement, the PCF provides the AMF with triggers for slice replacement.
	If a S-NSSAI in subject to network slice usage control, the PCF may provide a Slice Usage Policy information including, whether a network slice is on demand and a slice deregistration inactivity timer value, for the Subscribed S-NSSAIs as described in clause 5.15.15 of TS 23.501 [2].
17.	[Conditional] AMF to SMF: Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext () or Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext ().
	For an Emergency Registered UE (see TS 23.501 [2]), this step is applied when the Registration Type is Mobility Registration Update.
	The AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext (see clause 5.2.8.2.6) in the following scenario(s):
-	If the List Of PDU Sessions To Be Activated is included in the Registration Request in step 1, the AMF sends Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext Request to SMF(s) associated with the PDU Session(s) in order to activate User Plane connections of these PDU Session(s). Steps from step 5 onwards described in clause 4.2.3.2 are executed to complete the User Plane connection activation without sending the RRC Inactive Assistance Information and without sending MM NAS Service Accept from the AMF to (R)AN described in step 12 of clause 4.2.3.2. When a User Plane connection for a PDU Session is activated, the AS layer in the UE indicates it to the NAS layer.
-	If the AMF has determined in step 3 that the UE is performing Inter-RAT mobility to or from NB-IoT, the AMF sends Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext Request to SMF(s) associated with the UEs PDU Session(s), so the SMF(s) can update them according to the "PDU Session continuity at inter RAT mobility" subscription data. Steps from step 5 onwards described in clause 4.2.3.2 are executed without sending MM NAS Service Accept from the AMF to (R)AN described in step 12 of clause 4.2.3.2.
	When the serving AMF has changed, the new serving AMF notifies the SMF for each PDU Session that it has taken over the responsibility of the signalling path towards the UE: the new serving AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext service operation using SMF information received from the old AMF at step 5. It also indicates whether the PDU Session is to be re-activated.
NOTE 12:	If the UE moves into a different PLMN, the AMF in the serving PLMN can insert or change the V-SMF(s) in the serving PLMN for Home Routed PDU session(s). In addition, a V-SMF is removed in case the UE moves from a VPLMN into the HPLMN. In these cases, the same procedures described in clause 4.23.3 are applied for the V-SMF change as for the I-SMF change (i.e. by replacing the I-SMF with V-SMF). During inter-PLMN change, if the same SMF is used, session continuity can be supported depending on operator policies.
NOTE 13:	In the case of Indirect Network Sharing, when UE of participating operator moves between the shared network area and an area of its home network, a V-SMF can be inserted or removed. In this case, the related procedure of mobility registration update with V-SMF insertion/removal described in clause 4.23.3 is applied.
	Steps from step 5 onwards described in clause 4.2.3.2 are executed. In the case that the intermediate UPF insertion, removal, or change is performed for the PDU Session(s) not included in "PDU Session(s) to be re-activated", the procedure is performed without N11 and N2 interactions to update the N3 user plane between (R)AN and 5GC.
	The AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext service operation towards the SMF in the following scenario:
-	If any PDU Session status indicates that it is released at the UE, the AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext service operation towards the SMF in order to release any network resources related to the PDU Session.
-	If the UE has moved into a TA not supporting the S-NSSAI associated with the PDU Session, and the AMF determines to release the PDU Session, and no N2 interaction is needed (i.e. UP connection of the PDU Session is not active), the AMF sets the PDU Session status indicating that the PDU Session is released in the network and the AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_ReleaseSMContext service operation towards the SMF.
	If the serving AMF is changed, the new AMF shall wait until step 18 is finished with all the SMFs associated with the UE. Otherwise, steps 19 to 22 can continue in parallel to this step.
18.	[Conditional] If the new AMF and the old AMF are in the same PLMN, the new AMF sends a UE Context Modification Request to N3IWF/TNGF/W-AGF as specified in TS 29.413 [64].
	If the AMF has changed and the old AMF has indicated that the UE is in CM-CONNECTED state via N3IWF, W-AGF or TNGF and if the new AMF and the old AMF are in the same PLMN, the new AMF creates an NGAP UE association towards the N3IWF/TNGF/W-AGF to which the UE is connected. This automatically releases the existing NGAP UE association between the old AMF and the N3IWF/TNGF/W-AGF.
NOTE 14:	It is possible that the new AMF cannot create an NGAP UE association towards the N3IWF/TNGF/W-AGF, e.g. transport layer failure toward non-3GPP access network. In this case according to operator's policy the new AMF either only accept the registration over 3GPP access or accept the registration over both accesses. If the non-3GPP registered state is kept, this allows the UE to hand over the PDU Session from non-3GPP access to 3GPP access.
19.	N3IWF/TNGF/W-AGF sends a UE Context Modification Response to the new AMF.
19a.	[Conditional] After the new AMF receives the response message from the N3IWF, W-AGF or TNGF in step 19, the new AMF registers with the UDM using Nudm_UECM_Registration as step 14a, but with the Access Type set to "non-3GPP access". The UDM stores the associated Access Type together with the serving AMF and does not remove the AMF identity associated to the other Access Type if any. The UDM may store in UDR information provided at the AMF registration by Nudr_DM_Update.
19b.	[Conditional] When the UDM stores the associated Access Type (i.e. non-3GPP) together with the serving AMF as indicated in step 19a, it will cause the UDM to initiate a Nudm_UECM_DeregistrationNotification (see clause 5.2.3.2.2) to the old AMF corresponding to the same (i.e. non-3GPP) access. The old AMF removes the UE context for non-3GPP access.
19c.	The Old AMF unsubscribes with the UDM for subscription data using Nudm_SDM_unsubscribe.
20a.	Void.
21.	New AMF to UE: Registration Accept (5GS registration result, 5G-GUTI, Registration Area, [Mobility restrictions], [PDU Session status], [Allowed NSSAI], [Mapping Of Allowed NSSAI], [Partially Allowed NSSAI], [Mapping Of Partially Allowed NSSAI], [TAI List for S-NSSAIs in Partially Allowed NSSAI], [Configured NSSAI for the Serving PLMN], [Mapping Of Configured NSSAI], [NSSRG Information], [NSAG Information], [rejected S-NSSAIs], [TAI List for any rejected S-NSSAI Partially in the RA], [Pending NSSAI], [Mapping Of Pending NSSAI], [Periodic Registration Update timer], [Active Time], [Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication], [LADN Information], [MICO Indication], [IMS Voice over PS session supported Indication], [Emergency Service Support indicator], [Accepted DRX parameters for E-UTRA and NR], [Accepted DRX parameters for NB-IoT], [extended idle mode DRX parameters], [Paging Time Window], [Network support of Interworking without N26], [Access Stratum Connection Establishment NSSAI Inclusion Mode], [Network Slicing Subscription Change Indication], [Operator-defined access category definitions], [List of equivalent PLMNs], [Enhanced Coverage Restricted information], [Supported Network Behaviour], [Service Gap Time], [PLMN-assigned UE Radio Capability ID], [PLMN-assigned UE Radio Capability ID deletion], [WUS Assistance Information], [AMF PEIPS Assistance Information], [AMF LP-WUSPS Assistance Information], [Truncated 5G-S-TMSI Configuration], [Connection Release Supported], [Paging Cause Indication for Voice Service Supported], [Paging Restriction Supported], [Reject Paging Request Supported], [Paging Restriction Information acceptance / rejection], ["List of PLMN(s) to be used in Disaster Condition"], [Disaster Roaming wait range information], [Disaster Return wait range information], [Forbidden TAI(s)], [List of equivalent SNPNs], [Registered NID], [Unavailability Period Support], [MBSR authorization information], [Return To Coverage Notification Not Required], [Unavailability Period Duration], [Start of Unavailability Period], [S-NSSAI location availability information], [Mapping Of Alternative NSSAI], [Slice Usage Policy], [Maximum Time Offset]).
	The 5GS registration result indicates whether the UE is registered to 3GPP access and/or non-3GPP access as defined in TS 24.501 [25].
	If the Requested NSSAI does not include S-NSSAIs which map to S-NSSAIs of the HPLMN subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization and the AMF determines that no S-NSSAI can be provided in the Allowed NSSAI for the UE in the current UE's Tracking Area and if no default S-NSSAI(s) not yet involved in the current UE Registration procedure could be further considered, the AMF shall reject the UE Registration and shall include in the rejection message the list of Rejected S-NSSAIs, each of them with the appropriate rejection cause value.
	The Allowed NSSAI for the Access Type for the UE is included in the N2 message carrying the Registration Accept message. The Allowed NSSAI contains only S-NSSAIs that do not require, based on subscription information, Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization and based on the UE Context in the AMF, those S-NSSAIs for which Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization previously succeeded, regardless of the Access Type. The Mapping Of Pending NSSAI is the mapping of each S-NSSAI of the Pending NSSAI for the Serving PLMN to the HPLMN S-NSSAIs.
	If the UE has indicated its support for the Partial Network Slice support in a Registration Area (see clause 5.15.17 of TS 23.501 [2]) in the UE MM Core Network Capability in the Registration Request, the AMF may include Partially Allowed NSSAI in the Registration Accept with the related TAI List for S-NSSAIs in Partially allowed NSSAI as per TS 23.501 [2] clause 5.1517 and in the N2 message carrying the Registration Accept message without the TAI List for S-NSSAIs in Partially allowed NSSAI. The Partially Allowed NSSAI contains only S-NSSAIs that do not require, based on subscription information, Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization and based on the UE Context in the AMF, those S-NSSAIs for which Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization previously succeeded, regardless of the Access Type. The Mapping Of Partially Allowed NSSAI is the mapping of each S-NSSAI of the Partially Allowed NSSAI for the Serving PLMN to the HPLMN S-NSSAIs.
	If the UE has indicated its support for the Partial Network Slice support in a Registration Area (see clause 5.15.17 of TS 23.501 [2]) in the UE MM Core Network Capability in the Registration Request, the AMF may include S-NSSAI(s) rejected partially in the RA in the Registration Accept with the applicable TAI List for rejected S-NSSAI partially in the RA.
	If the UE has indicated its support of the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure in the UE MM Core Network Capability in the Registration Request, AMF includes in the Pending NSSAI the S-NSSAIs that map to an S-NSSAI of the HPLMN which in the subscription information has indication that it is subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization, as described in clause 4.6.2.4 of TS 24.501 [25]. In such case, the AMF then shall trigger at step 25 the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure, specified in clause 4.2.9.2, except, based on Network policies, for those S-NSSAIs for which Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization have already been initiated on another Access Type for the same S-NSSAI(s). The UE shall not attempt re-registration with the S-NSSAIs included in the list of Pending NSSAIs until the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure has been completed, regardless of the Access Type.
	If the UE has not indicated its support of the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure in the UE 5GMM Core Network Capability in the Registration Request and the Requested NSSAI includes S-NSSAIs which map to HPLMN S-NSSAIs subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization, the AMF includes those S-NSSAIs in the Requested NSSAI in the Rejected S-NSSAIs.
	If no S-NSSAI can be provided in the Allowed NSSAI because:
-	all the S-NSSAI(s) in the Requested NSSAI are to be subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization; or
-	no Requested NSSAI was provided or none of the S-NSSAIs in the Requested NSSAI matches any of the Subscribed S-NSSAIs and all the S-NSSAI(s) marked as default in the Subscribed S-NSSAIs are to be subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization.
	The AMF shall provide an empty Allowed NSSAI. Upon receiving an empty Allowed NSSAI and a Pending NSSAI, the UE is registered in the PLMN but shall wait for the completion of the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure without attempting to use any service provided by the PLMN on any access, except e.g. emergency services (see TS 24.501 [25]), until the UE receives an Allowed NSSAI.
	The AMF stores the NB-IoT Priority retrieved in Step 14 and associates it to the 5G-S-TMSI allocated to the UE.
	If the Registration Request message received over 3GPP access does not include any Paging Restriction Information, the AMF shall delete any stored Paging Restriction Information for this UE and stop restricting paging accordingly.
	If the Registration Request message received over 3GPP access includes the Paging Restriction Information, AMF may accept or reject the Paging Restriction Information requested by the UE based on operator policy. If the AMF rejects the Paging Restriction Information, the AMF removes any stored Paging Restriction Information from the UE context and discards the UE requested Paging Restriction Information. If the AMF accepts the Paging Restriction Information from the UE, the AMF stores the Paging Restriction Information from the UE in the UE context and informs the UE about the acceptance/rejection of the requested Paging Restriction Information in the Registration Accept message.
	If the Registration Request message received over 3GPP access includes a Release Request indication, then:
-	the AMF updates the UE context with any received Paging Restriction Information, then enforces it in the network triggered Service Request procedure as described in clause 4.2.3.3;
-	the AMF does not establish User Plane resources and triggers the AN release procedure as described in clause 4.2.6 after the completion of Registration procedure.
	The AMF sends a Registration Accept message to the UE indicating that the Registration Request has been accepted. 5G-GUTI is included if the AMF allocates a new 5G-GUTI. Upon receiving a Registration Request message of type "Initial Registration", "mobility registration update", "Disaster Roaming Initial Registration" or "Disaster Roaming Mobility Registration Update" from the UE, the AMF shall include a new 5G-GUTI in the Registration Accept message. Upon receiving a Registration Request message of type "periodic registration update" from the UE, the AMF should include a new 5G-GUTI in the Registration Accept message. If the UE is already in RM-REGISTERED state via another access in the same PLMN, the UE shall use the 5G-GUTI received in the Registration Accept for both registrations. If no 5G-GUTI is included in the Registration Accept, then the UE uses the 5G-GUTI assigned for the existing registration also for the new registration. If the AMF allocates a new Registration area, it shall send the Registration area to the UE via Registration Accept message. For a Disaster Roaming Registration, the AMF allocates the Registration Area limited to the area with Disaster Condition as specified in clause 5.40 of TS 23.501 [2]. If there is no Registration area included in the Registration Accept message, the UE shall consider the old Registration Area as valid. Mobility Restrictions is included if mobility restrictions applies for the UE and Registration Type is not Emergency Registration. The AMF indicates the established PDU Sessions to the UE in the PDU Session status. The UE removes locally any internal resources related to PDU Sessions that are not marked as established in the received PDU Session status. If the AMF invokes the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext procedure for UP activation of PDU Session(s) in step 18 and receives rejection from the SMF, then the AMF indicates to the UE the PDU Session ID and the cause why the User Plane resources were not activated. When the UE is connected to the two AMFs belonging to different PLMN via 3GPP access and non-3GPP access then the UE removes locally any internal resources related to the PDU Session of the current PLMN that are not marked as established in received PDU Session status. If the PDU Session status information was in the Registration Request, the AMF shall indicate the PDU Session status to the UE.
	If the RAT Type is NB-IoT and the network is configured to use the Control Plane Relocation Indication procedure then the AMF shall include in the Registration Accept message the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI Configuration that the UE using Control Plane CIoT 5GS Optimisation uses to create the Truncated 5G-S-TMSI, see clause 5.31.4.3 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The Allowed NSSAI provided in the Registration Accept is valid in the Registration Area and it applies for all the PLMNs which have their Tracking Areas included in the Registration Area. The Mapping Of Allowed NSSAI is the mapping of each S-NSSAI of the Allowed NSSAI to the HPLMN S-NSSAIs. The Mapping Of Configured NSSAI is the mapping of each S-NSSAI of the Configured NSSAI for the Serving PLMN to the HPLMN S-NSSAIs.
	For non-roaming UE, if the UE has indicated its support of Slice Usage Policy in the UE 5GMM Core Network Capability, the AMF may include Slice Usage Policies for the slices in the Configured NSSAI as described in clause 5.15.15 of TS 23.501 [2]. In the Slice Usage Policy, the AMF indicates if an S-NSSAI is on demand slice and optionally slice deregistration inactivity timer value. If the AMF includes slice deregistration inactivity timer value, the UE starts any slice deregistration inactivity timer for the on demand S-NSSAIs as described in clause 5.15.15 of TS 23.501 [2]. If the AMF includes updated slice deregistration timer value(s), the UE uses the updated slice deregistration inactivity timer value(s) next time the slice deregistration inactivity timer(s) starts.
	If the UE has indicated its support of the subscription-based restrictions to simultaneous registration of network slices feature in the UE 5GMM Core Network Capability, the AMF includes, if available, the NSSRG Information, defined in clause 5.15.12 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the UE has not indicated its support of the subscription-based restrictions to simultaneous registration of network slices feature and the subscription information for the UE includes NSSRG information and the AMF is providing the Configured NSSAI to the UE, the Configured NSSAI shall include the S-NSSAIs according to clause 5.15.12 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the UE has indicated its support for temporary available network slices feature in the UE 5GMM Core Network Capability, the AMF includes validity time defined in clause 5.15.16 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the UE has not indicated its support for temporary available network slices feature in the UE 5GMM Core Network Capability and the AMF is providing the Configured NSSAI to the UE, the Configured NSSAI shall not include the S-NSSAIs if the validity time indicates S-NSSAI is not available according to clause 5.15.16 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the UE has indicated its support of the NSAG feature in the 5GMM Core Network Capability, the AMF includes, if available, the NSAG Information, defined in clause 5.15.14 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The AMF shall include in the Registration Accept message the LADN Information for the list of LADNs, described in clause 5.6.5 of TS 23.501 [2], that are available within the Registration area determined by the AMF for the UE. If the UE indicates its support of LADN per DNN and S-NSSAI in the UE MM Core Network Capability, the AMF may include LADN Information per DNN and S-NSSAI. The AMF may include Operator-defined access category definitions to let the UE determinine the applicable Operator-specific access category definitions as described in TS 24.501 [25].
	If the UE included MICO Indication in the Registration Request, then AMF responds in the Registration Accept message whether MICO mode should be used in the MICO Indication. When MICO mode is allowed for the UE, the AMF may include an Active Time value and/or Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication in the Registration Accept message. The AMF determines the Periodic Registration Update timer value, Active Time value and the Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication based on:
-	local configuration;
-	Expected UE Behaviour if available;
-	UE indicated preferences;
-	UE capability;
-	UE subscription information;
-	if using a RAN that provides discontinuous coverage, UE availability (see clause 5.4.13.1 of TS 23.501 [2]); and
-	network policies,
	or any combination of them so as to enable UE power saving, as described in clause 5.31.7 of TS 23.501 [2]. The AMF determines to apply the Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication to the UE if the UE indicates its capability of the Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication in the registration request message, as described in step 1. If the AMF provides the Periodic Registration Update timer value with the Strictly Periodic Registration Timer Indication to the UE, the UE and the AMF start the Periodic Registration Update timer after this step, as described in clause 5.31.7.5 of TS 23.501 [2].
	In the case of registration over 3GPP access, the AMF Sets the IMS Voice over PS session supported Indication as described in clause 5.16.3.2 of TS 23.501 [2]. In order to set the IMS Voice over PS session supported Indication the AMF may need to perform the UE Capability Match Request procedure in clause 4.2.8a to check the compatibility of the UE and NG-RAN radio capabilities related to IMS Voice over PS. If the AMF hasn't received Voice Support Match Indicator from the NG-RAN on time then, based on implementation, AMF may set IMS Voice over PS session supported Indication and update it at a later stage.
	In the case of registration over 3GPP access and the AMF has retrieved or determined according to local configuration a Target NSSAI and a corresponding RFSP Index for the purpose of allowing the NG-RAN to redirect the UE to a cell supporting network slices not available in the current TA as described in clause 5.3.4.3.3 of TS 23.501 [2], the AMF provides the Target NSSAI and the corresponding RFSP Index to the NG-RAN.
	In the case of registration over non-3GPP access, the AMF Sets the IMS Voice over PS session supported Indication as described in clause 5.16.3.2a of TS 23.501 [2].
	The Emergency Service Support indicator informs the UE that emergency services are supported, i.e. the UE is allowed to request PDU Session for emergency services. If the AMF received "MPS priority" from the UDM as part of Access and Mobility Subscription data, based on operator policy, "MPS priority" is included in the Registration Accept message to the UE to inform the UE whether configuration of Access Identity 1 is valid within the selected PLMN, as specified in TS 24.501 [25]. If the AMF received "MCX priority" from the UDM as part of Access and Mobility Subscription data, based on operator policy and UE subscription to MCX Services, "MCX priority" is included in the Registration Accept message to the UE to inform the UE whether configuration of Access Identity 2 is valid within the selected PLMN, as specified in TS 24.501 [25].
	The Accepted DRX parameters are defined in clause 5.4.5 of TS 23.501 [2]. The AMF includes Accepted DRX parameters for NB-IoT, if the UE included Requested DRX parameters for NB-IoT in the Registration Request message. The AMF Sets the Network support of Interworking without N26 parameter as described in clause 5.17.2.3.1 of TS 23.501 [2]. If the AMF accepts the use of extended idle mode DRX, the AMF includes the extended idle mode DRX parameters and Paging Time Window as described in 5.31.7.2 of TS 23.501 [2]. For a UE using NR satellite access that provides discontinuous coverage, the AMF may determine extended idle mode DRX parameters and Paging Time Window considering the Unavailability Period Duration (if available), Start of Unavailability Period (if available) and the UE requested extended idle mode DRX parameters as described in clause 5.4.13.1 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the UDM intends to indicate the UE that subscription has changed, the Network Slicing Subscription Change Indication is included. If the AMF includes Network Slicing Subscription Change Indication, then the UE shall locally erase all the network slicing configuration for all PLMNs and if applicable, update the configuration for the current PLMN based on any received information.
	The Access Stratum Connection Establishment NSSAI Inclusion Mode, as specified in clause 5.15.9 of TS 23.501 [2], is included to instruct the UE on what NSSAI, if any, to include in the Access Stratum connection establishment. The AMF can set the value to modes of operation a,b,c defined in clause 5.15.9 of TS 23.501 [2] in the 3GPP Access only if the Inclusion of NSSAI in RRC Connection Establishment Allowed indicates that it is allowed to do so.
	For a UE registered in a PLMN, the AMF may provide a List of equivalent PLMNs which is handled as specified in TS 24.501 [25]. The AMF shall not provide a list of equivalent SNPNs to the UE.
	For a UE registered in an SNPN and the UE has included support of equivalent SNPNs in step 1, the AMF may provide a List of equivalent SNPNs which is handled as specified in TS 24.501 [25]. The AMF shall not provide a list of equivalent PLMNs to the UE.
	If the UE included support for restriction of use of Enhanced Coverage in step 1, the AMF sends the Enhanced Coverage Restricted information to the NG-RAN in N2 message. The AMF also sends Enhanced Coverage Restricted information to the UE in the Registration Accept message.
	If the UE receives Enhanced Coverage Restricted information in the Registration Accept message, the UE shall store this information and shall use the value of Enhanced Coverage Restricted information to determine if Enhanced Coverage feature should be used or not.
	If the UE and the AMF have negotiated to enable MICO mode via MICO Indication and the AMF uses the Extended connected timer, then the AMF provides the Extended Connected time value to NG-RAN (see clause 5.31.7.3 of TS 23.501 [2]) in this step. The Extended Connected Time value indicates the minimum time the RAN should keep the UE in RRC_CONNECTED state regardless of inactivity. For a UE using NR satellite access that provides discontinuous coverage, the AMF may determine the Extended Connected Timer value considering the Unavailability Period Duration (if available), Start of Unavailability Period (if available) as described in clause 5.4.13.1 of TS 23.501 [2].
	The AMF indicates the CIoT 5GS Optimisations it supports and accepts in the Supported Network Behaviour information (see clause 5.31.2 of TS 23.501 [2]) if the UE included Preferred Network Behaviour in its Registration Request.
	The AMF may steer the UE from 5GC by rejecting the Registration Request. The AMF should take into account the Preferred and Supported Network Behaviour (see clause 5.31.2 of TS 23.501 [2]) and availability of EPC to the UE before steering the UE from 5GC.
	If the AMF accepts MICO mode as indicated in Registration Accept via MICO Indication and knows there may be mobile terminated data or signalling pending, the AMF maintains the N2 connection for at least the Extended Connected Time as described in clause 5.31.7.3 of TS 23.501 [2] and provides the Extended Connected Time value to the RAN.
	The AMF includes Service Gap Time if Service Gap Time is present in the subscription information (steps 14a-c) or the Service Gap Time has been updated by the Subscriber Data Update Notification to AMF procedure (see clause 4.5.1) and the UE has indicated UE Service Gap Control Capability.
	If the UE receives a Service Gap Time in the Registration Accept message, the UE shall store this parameter and apply Service Gap Control (see clause 5.31.16 of TS 23.501 [2]).
	If the network supports WUS grouping (see TS 23.501 [2]), the AMF shall send the WUS Assistance Information to the UE. If the UE provided the UE paging probability information in Step 1, the AMF takes it into account to determine the WUS Assistance Information.
	If the UE provided Paging Subgrouping Support Indication in step 1, a supporting AMF may provide the AMF PEIPS Assistance Information, including the Paging Subgroup ID as defined in TS 23.501 [2].
	If the UE provided LP-WUS Subgrouping Support Indication in step 1, a supporting AMF may provide the AMF LP-WUSPS Assistance Information, including the LP-WUS Subgroup ID as defined in TS 23.501 [2].
	When the UE and the AMF supports RACS as defined in clause 5.4.4.1a of TS 23.501 [2] and the AMF needs to configure the UE with a UE Radio Capability ID and the AMF already has the UE radio capabilities other than NB-IoT radio capabilities for the UE, the AMF may provide the UE with the UE Radio Capability ID for the UE radio capabilities the UCMF returns to the AMF in a Nucmf_assign service operation for this UE. Alternatively, when the UE and the AMF support RACS, the AMF may provide the UE with an indication to delete any PLMN-assigned UE Radio Capability ID in this PLMN (see clause 5.4.4.1a of TS 23.501 [2]).
	If the UE is "CAG supported" and the AMF needs to update the CAG information of the UE, the AMF may include the CAG information as part of the Mobility Restrictions in the Registration Accept message.
	If the UE has indicated the support of Unavailability Period in the UE MM Core Network Capability in the Registration Request, the AMF shall indicate to the UE whether the corresponding feature is supported by providing the "Unavailability Period Support" indication.
	If both the UE and the AMF support the Unavailability Period, the AMF may provide an Unavailability Period Duration and/or Start of Unavailability Period determined due to NR satellite access discontinuous coverage during initial registration procedure as described in clause 5.4.1.4 of TS 23.501 [2]. If the UE has provided Unavailability Period Duration and/or Start of Unavailability Period in step 1, the AMF shall store the received Unavailability Period Duration and/or Start of Unavailability Period in UE context. The AMF considers that the UE is unavailable at the start of unavailability period as described in clause 5.4.1.4 of TS 23.501 [2]. The AMF may provide Periodic Registration Update timer based on Unavailability Period Duration and/or Start of Unavailability Period indicated by the UE as described in clause 5.4.1.4 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the Multi-USIM UE has indicated support for one or more Multi-USIM Specific Capabilities in the UE 5GMM Core Network Capability in step 1, the AMF shall indicate to the Multi-USIM UE whether the corresponding one or more Multi-USIM specific features described in clause 5.38 of TS 23.501 [2] are supported, based on network capability and preference by the network (i.e. based on local network policy), by providing one or more of the Connection Release Supported, Paging Cause Indication for Voice Service Supported, Paging Restriction Supported and Reject Paging Request Supported indications. The AMF shall only indicate Paging Restriction Supported together with either Connection Release Supported or Reject Paging Request Supported. The UE shall only use Multi-USIM specific features that the AMF indicated as being supported.
	If the NG-RAN provides MBSR indication in step 3 and the subscription data received in step 14 does not allow the MBSR operation, the AMF may either accept the registration with providing the MBSR authorization information to MBSR (IAB-UE), or the AMF may reject the registration if the PLMN does not allow the MBSR (IAB-UE) to be registered to the PLMN as specified in clause 5.35A.4 of TS 23.501 [2].
	For the authorization of MWAB-UE as specified in clause 5.49.3 of TS 23.501 [2], the AMF determines the Allowed NSSAI for MWAB-UE which includes the S-NSSAI(s) which is (are) used to establish the BH PDU session(s).
	If the UE and AMF supports Disaster Roaming service, the AMF may include the "list of PLMN(s) to be used in Disaster Condition", Disaster Roaming wait range information and Disaster Return wait range information as specified in TS 23.501 [2].
	If AMF receives multiple TAIs from the NG-RAN in step 3 and determines that some, but not all of them are forbidden by subscription or by operator policy, the AMF shall include the forbidden TAI(s) in the Registration Accept message.
	In the case of Emergency Registration, the AMF shall not indicate support for any Multi-USIM specific features to the UE.
	If the UE has included support of equivalent SNPNs in step 1 and the serving SNPN changes, the AMF shall include the Registered NID in the Registration Accept message as specified in TS 23.501 [2].
	For a UE using NR satellite access that provides discontinuous coverage, the AMF may provide Return To Coverage Notification Not Required, which requests the UE in CM-IDLE state to not perform the Mobility Registration Update procedure when it returns to coverage and/or provide the UE with a Unavailability Period Duration and/or Start of Unavailability Period (if available), as described in clause 5.4.13.1 of TS 23.501 [2]. The AMF may determine a Maximum Time Offset and provide it to UE when it is allowed to initiate NAS signalling with the network as described in clause 5.4.13.5 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the UE has indicated the support of S-NSSAI location availability information, the AMF may include S-NSSAI location availability information as described in clause 5.15.18 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the UE indicated a support for the Network Slice Replacement feature in the 5GMM Core Network Capability and the AMF determines that an S-NSSAI from an Allowed NSSAI is to be replaced with an Alternative S-NSSAI (as described in clause 5.15.19 of TS 23.501 [2]), the AMF includes the Mapping Of Alternative NSSAI within the Registration Accept message to the UE and also adds the Alternative S-NSSAI to the Allowed NSSAI and/or Configured NSSAI, if not already included. The Mapping Of Alternative NSSAI is the mapping of each Alternative S-NSSAI, included in the Allowed NSSAI and/or Configured NSSAI, to the corresponding replaced VPLMN S-NSSAI or HPLMN S-NSSAI (as described in clause 5.15.19 of TS 23.501 [2]).
	If the UE has indicated a support for reconnection to the network due to RAN timing synchronization status in step 1 as described in TS 23.501 [2], and if the AMF received "clock quality detail level" either as part of an AM Policy Association procedure or from the UDM as part of Clock Quality Reporting Control Information (CQRCI) included in the Access and Mobility Subscription data, "UE reconnection indication" is included in the Registration Accept message to the UE to inform the UE when to connect to the network in case when the UE later detects that the NG-RAN timing synchronization status has changed while the UE is in RRC IDLE or RRC INACTIVE state, as specified in clause 5.27.1.12 of TS 23.501 [2].
21b.	[Optional] The new AMF performs a UE Policy Association Establishment as defined in clause 4.16.11. For an Emergency Registration, this step is skipped.
	The new AMF sends a Npcf_UEPolicyControl Create Request to PCF. PCF sends a Npcf_UEPolicyControl Create Response to the new AMF.
	PCF triggers UE Configuration Update Procedure as defined in clause 4.2.4.3.
22.	[Conditional] UE to new AMF: Registration Complete ().
	The UE sends a Registration Complete message to the AMF when it has successfully updated itself after receiving any of the [Configured NSSAI for the Serving PLMN], [Mapping Of Configured NSSAI], [NSSRG Information], [NSAG Information] and a Network Slicing Subscription Change Indication, or CAG information in step 21.
	The UE sends a Registration Complete message to the AMF to acknowledge if a new 5G-GUTI was assigned.
	If new 5G-GUTI was assigned, then the UE passes the new 5G-GUTI to its 3GPP access' lower layer when a lower layer (either 3GPP access or non-3GPP access) indicates to the UE's RM layer that the Registration Complete message has been successfully transferred across the radio interface.
NOTE 15:	The above is needed because the NG-RAN may use the RRC_INACTIVE state and a part of the 5G-GUTI is used to calculate the Paging Frame (see TS 38.304 [44] and TS 36.304 [43]). It is assumed that the Registration Complete is reliably delivered to the AMF after the 5G-AN has acknowledged its receipt to the UE.
	When the List Of PDU Sessions To Be Activated is not included in the Registration Request and the Registration procedure was not initiated in CM-CONNECTED state, the AMF releases the signalling connection with UE, according to clause 4.2.6.
	When the Follow-on request is included in the Registration Request, the AMF should not release the signalling connection after the completion of the Registration procedure.
	If the AMF is aware that some signalling is pending in the AMF or between the UE and the 5GC, the AMF should not release the signalling connection immediately after the completion of the Registration procedure.
	If the UE has provided Unavailability Period Duration and not included Start of Unavailability Period in step 1, the AMF shall release the signalling connection immediately after the completion of the Registration procedure.
	If the UE has indicated Start of Unavailability Period in step 1, the AMF shall release the signalling connection before the start of unavailability period.
	If PLMN-assigned UE Radio Capability ID is included in step 21, the AMF stores the PLMN-assigned UE Radio Capability ID in UE context if receiving Registration Complete message.
	If the AMF provided updated slice deregistration timer value(s) to the UE in step 21, the AMF uses the corresponding slice deregistration inactivity timer value(s) next time the slice deregistration inactivity timer(s) starts.
	If the UE receives PLMN-assigned UE Radio Capability ID deletion indication in step 21, the UE shall delete the PLMN-assigned UE Radio Capability ID(s) for this PLMN.
23.	[Conditional] AMF to UDM: If the Access and Mobility Subscription data provided by UDM to AMF in 14b includes Steering of Roaming information with an indication that the UDM requests an acknowledgement of the reception of this information from the UE, the AMF provides the UE acknowledgement to UDM using Nudm_SDM_Info. For more details regarding the handling of Steering of Roaming information refer to TS 23.122 [22].
23a.	For Registration over 3GPP Access, if the AMF does not release the signalling connection, the AMF sends the RRC Inactive Assistance Information to the NG-RAN.
	For Registration over non-3GPP Access, if the UE is also in CM-CONNECTED state on 3GPP access, the AMF sends the RRC Inactive Assistance Information to the NG-RAN. If the Multi-USIM UE has indicated support for the Paging Cause Indication for Voice Service feature and the network supports the Paging Cause Indication for Voice Service, the AMF shall include an indication in the RRC Inactive Assistance Information that the UE supports the Paging Cause Indication for Voice Service to NG-RAN to enable NG-RAN to apply the Paging Cause Indication for Voice Service feature for RAN based paging.
	The AMF also uses the Nudm_SDM_Info service operation to provide an acknowledgment to UDM that the UE received CAG information, or the Network Slicing Subscription Change Indication (see step 21 and step 22) and acted upon it.
24.	[Conditional] AMF to UDM: After step 14a and in parallel to any of the preceding steps, the AMF shall send a "Homogeneous Support of IMS Voice over PS Sessions" indication to the UDM using Nudm_UECM_Update:
-	If the AMF has evaluated the support of IMS Voice over PS Sessions, see clause 5.16.3.2 of TS 23.501 [2]; and
-	If the AMF determines that it needs to update the Homogeneous Support of IMS Voice over PS Sessions, see clause 5.16.3.3 of TS 23.501 [2].
25.	[Conditional] If the UE indicates its support for Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure in the UE MM Core Network Capability in Registration Request and any S-NSSAI of the HPLMN is subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization, the related procedure is executed at this step (see clause 4.2.9.1). Once the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure is completed for all S-NSSAIs, the AMF shall trigger a UE Configuration Update procedure to deliver an Allowed NSSAI (or Partially Allowed NSSAI) containing also the S-NSSAIs for which the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization was successful and include any rejected NSSAIs with an appropriate rejection cause value.
	The AMF stores an indication in the UE context for any S-NSSAI of the HPLMN subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization for which the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization succeeds.
	Once completed the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure, if the AMF determines that no S-NSSAI can be provided in the Allowed NSSAI for the UE, which is already authenticated and authorized successfully by a PLMN and if no default S-NSSAI(s) could be further considered, the AMF shall execute the Network-initiated Deregistration procedure described in clause 4.2.2.3.3 and shall include in the explicit De-Registration Request message the list of Rejected S-NSSAIs, each of them with the appropriate rejection cause value.
If Unavailability Period Duration is received from the UE and there is "Loss of Connectivity" monitoring event subscription for the UE, the AMF triggers "Loss of Connectivity" monitoring event report and includes the remaining values of the Unavailability Period Duration as described in clause 4.15.
The mobility related event notifications towards the NF consumers are triggered at the end of this procedure for cases as described in clause 4.15.4.
Clause:	Clause 4.4.2.2	4.4.2.2	N4 Session Level Reporting Procedure
This procedure is used by the UPF to report events related to an N4 session for an individual PDU Session. The triggers for event reporting were configured on the UPF during N4 Session Establishment/Modification procedures by the SMF.

Figure 4.4.2.2-1: N4 Session Level Reporting procedure
1.	The UPF detects that an event has to be reported. The reporting triggers include the following cases:
(1)	Measurement information reporting (Usage Report).
	Measurement information shall be collected in the UPF and reported to the SMF as defined in clause 5.8 and clause 5.12 of TS 23.501 [2].
NOTE 1:	The Usage Report is also used for the reporting of other events or information. For details refer to clause 7.5.8.3 of TS 29.244 [69].
(2)	Start of traffic detection (Usage Report).
	When traffic detection is requested by SMF and the start of traffic is detected for a Packet Detection Rule (PDR) as described in clause 5.8 of TS 23.501 [2], the UPF shall report the start of traffic detection to the SMF and indicate the corresponding PDR rule ID.
(3)	Stop of traffic detection (Usage Report).
	When traffic detection is requested by SMF and the end of traffic is detected for a PDR as described in clause 5.8 of TS 23.501 [2], the UPF shall report the stop of traffic detection to the SMF and indicate the corresponding PDR rule ID.
(4) Detection of 1st downlink packet for a QoS Flow of a PDU Session with UP Connection deactivated (Downlink Data Report).
	When UPF receives the first downlink packet for a QoS Flow but no N3/N9 tunnel for downlink data transmission exists and the buffering is performed by the UPF, it shall report the detection of 1st downlink packet to SMF also indicating the QoS Flow for which the downlink packet was received (for the purpose of downlink data notification). The UPF shall also report the DSCP of the packet if the PDU Session type is IP (to support the Paging Policy Differentiation feature described in clause 5.4.3 of TS 23.501 [2]).
(5) Detection of PDU Session Inactivity for a specified period (User Plane Inactivity Report).
	When an Inactivity Timer for a PDU Session is provided by SMF during N4 Session Establishment/Modification procedure and the UPF detects the PDU Session has no data transfer for a period specified by the Inactivity Timer, it shall report PDU Session Inactivity to the SMF.
NOTE 2:	As described in clause 4.3.7, an Inactivity Timer to the UPF is not provided by the SMF for always-on PDU Sessions.
(6)	QoS Monitoring Report (Session Report).
	When the QoS Monitoring is enabled for the QoS Flow, performs the necessary actions as described in clauses 5.8.2.18 and 5.45 of TS 23.501 [2]. The details about when and how the UPF sends the QoS Monitoring reports are described in clause 5.8.2.18 of TS 23.501 [2]. When receiving the QoS monitoring reports from the UPF, the SMF sends the reports to the target NF according to the information for QoS Monitoring received in the PCC rules as described in TS 23.503 [20].
(7)	TSC Management Information available (TSC Management Information).
	When TSC management information is available, the UPF shall provide the TSC management information in the TSC Management Information to the SMF as defined in clause 5.8.5.14 of TS 23.501 [2].
(8)	Discard Downlink Traffic detection (Downlink Data Report).
	When discarded downlink traffic detection is requested by SMF for a PDR and the first downlink packet is discarded after being buffered for this PDR as described in clause 5.8.3.2 of TS 23.501 [2], the UPF shall report the discarded downlink traffic detection to the SMF and indicate the corresponding PDR rule ID (for the purpose of downlink data delivery status notification).
(9)	Buffered Downlink Traffic detection (Downlink Data Report).
	When buffered downlink traffic detection is requested by SMF for a PDR and the first downlink packet is buffered for this PDR as described in clause 5.8.3.2 of TS 23.501 [2], the UPF shall report the buffered downlink traffic detection to the SMF and indicate the corresponding PDR rule ID (for the purpose of downlink data delivery status notification).
(10)	N6 Traffic Parameter Measurement Report (Session Report).
	When the N6 Traffic Parameters measurement report is requested by SMF for a QoS Flow as described in clause 5.37.8.2 of TS 23.501 [2], the UPF shall report to the SMF the N6 Traffic Parameter(s) for the specified QoS Flow (i.e. the N6 jitter range associated with the DL periodicity and conditionally, the UL/DL periodicity).
2.	The UPF sends an N4 session report message (N4 Session ID, list of [Usage Report, Downlink Data Report, Session Report, User Plane Inactivity Report, TSC Management Information]) to the SMF.
3.	The SMF identifies the N4 session context based on the received N4 Session ID and applies the reported information for the corresponding PDU Session. The SMF responds with an N4 session report ACK message.
Clause:	Clause 4.2.9.2	4.2.9.2	Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization

Figure 4.2.9.2-1: Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure
1.	For S-NSSAIs that are requiring Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization, based on change of subscription information, or triggered by the AAA-S, the AMF may trigger the start of the Network Slice Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure.
	If Network Slice Specific Authentication and Authorization is triggered as a result of Registration procedure, the AMF may determine, based on UE Context in the AMF, that for some or all S-NSSAI(s) subject to Network Slice Specific Authentication and Authorization, the UE has already been authenticated following a Registration procedure on a first access. Depending on Network Slice Specific Authentication and Authorization result (e.g. success/failure) from the previous Registration, the AMF may decide, based on Network policies, to skip Network Slice Specific Authentication and Authorization for these S-NSSAIs during the Registration on a second access.
	If the Network Slice Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure corresponds to a re-authentication and re-authorization procedure triggered as a result of AAA Server-triggered UE re-authentication and re-authorization for one or more S-NSSAIs, as described in 4.2.9.2, or triggered by the AMF based on operator policy or a subscription change and if S-NSSAIs that are requiring Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization are included in the Allowed NSSAI for each Access Type, the AMF selects an Access Type to be used to perform the Network Slice Specific Authentication and Authorization procedure based on network policies.
2.	The AMF may send an EAP Identity Request for the S-NSSAI in a NAS MM Transport message including the S-NSSAI. This is the S-NSSAI of the H-PLMN, not the locally mapped S-NSSAI value.
3.	The UE provides the EAP Identity Response for the S-NSSAI alongside the S-NSSAI in an NAS MM Transport message towards the AMF.
4.	The AMF sends the EAP Identity Response to the NSSAAF in a Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Authenticate Request (EAP Identity Response, GPSI, S-NSSAI).
NOTE:	If the UE subscription includes multiple GPSIs, the AMF uses any GPSI in the list provided by the UDM for NSSAA procedures.
5.	If the AAA-P is present (e.g. because the AAA-S belongs to a third party and the operator deploys a proxy towards third parties), the NSSAAF forwards the EAP ID Response message to the AAA-P, otherwise the NSSAAF forwards the message directly to the AAA-S. The NSSAAF is responsible to send the NSSAA requests to the appropriate AAA-S based on local configuration of AAA-S address per S-NSSAI. The NSSAAF uses towards the AAA-P or the AAA-S an AAA protocol message of the same protocol supported by the AAA-S.
6.	The AAA-P forwards the EAP Identity message to the AAA-S addressable by the AAA-S address together with S-NSSAI and GPSI. The AAA-S stores the GPSI to create an association with the EAP Identity in the EAP ID response message, so the AAA-S can later use it to revoke authorization or to trigger reauthentication.
7-14.	EAP-messages are exchanged with the UE. One or more than one iteration of these steps may occur.
15.	EAP authentication completes. The AAA-S stores the S-NSSAI for which the authorisation has been granted, so it may decide to trigger reauthentication and reauthorization based on its local policies. An EAP-Success/Failure message is delivered to the AAA-P (or if the AAA-P is not present, directly to the NSSAAF) with GPSI and S-NSSAI.
16.	If the AAA-P is used, the AAA-P sends an AAA Protocol message including (EAP-Success/Failure, S-NSSAI, GPSI) to the NSSAAF.
17.	The NSSAAF sends the Nnssaaf_NSSAA_Authenticate Response (EAP-Success/Failure, S-NSSAI, GPSI) to the AMF.
18.	The AMF transmits a NAS MM Transport message (EAP-Success/Failure) to the UE. The AMF shall store the EAP result for each S-NSSAI for which the NSSAA procedure in steps 1-17 was executed.
19a.	[Conditional] If a new Allowed NSSAI (i.e. including any new S-NSSAIs in a Requested NSSAI for which the NSSAA procedure succeeded and/or excluding any S-NSSAI(s) in the existing Allowed NSSAI for the UE for which the procedure has failed, or including default S-NSSAI(s) if all S-NSSAIs in a Requested NSSAI or in the existing Allowed NSSAI are subject to NSSAA and due to failure of the NSSAA procedures, they cannot be in the Allowed NSSAI)) and/or new Rejected S-NSSAIs (i.e. including any S-NSSAI(s) in the existing Allowed NSSAI for the UE for which the procedure has failed, or any new requested S-NSSAI(s) for which the NSSAA procedure failed) need to be delivered to the UE, or if the AMF re-allocation is required, the AMF initiates the UE Configuration Update procedure, for each Access Type, as described in clause 4.2.4.2. If the Network Slice-Specific Re-Authentication and Re-Authorization fails and there are PDU session(s) established that are associated with the S-NSSAI for which the NSSAA procedure failed, the AMF shall initiate the PDU Session Release procedure as specified in clause 4.3.4 to release the PDU sessions with the appropriate cause value.
19b.	[Conditional] If the Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization fails for all S-NSSAIs (if any) in the existing Allowed NSSAI for the UE and (if any) for all S-NSSAIs in the Requested NSSAI and no default S-NSSAI could be added in the Allowed NSSAI, the AMF shall execute the Network-initiated Deregistration procedure described in clause 4.2.2.3.3 and it shall include in the explicit De-Registration Request the list of Rejected S-NSSAIs, each of them with the appropriate rejection cause value.
Clause:	Clause 4.2.9.4	4.2.9.4	AAA Server triggered Slice-Specific Authorization Revocation

Figure 4.2.9.4-1: AAA Server-initiated Network Slice-Specific Authorization Revocation procedure
1.	The AAA-S requests the revocation of authorization for the Network Slice specified by the S-NSSAI in the AAA protocol Revoke Auth Request message, for the UE identified by the GPSI in this message. This message is sent to AAA-P if it is used.
2.	The AAA-P, if present, relays the request to the NSSAAF.
3a-3b.	The NSSAAF gets AMF ID from UDM using Nudm_UECM_Get with the GPSI in the received AAA message. If two different AMF addresses are received, the NSSAAF initiates the step 4 towards both AMFs.
3c.	The NSSAAF provides an acknowledgement to the AAA protocol Re-Auth Request message. If the AMF is not registered in UDM the procedure is stopped here.
4.	If the AMF is registered in UDM, the NSSAAF notifies the AMF to revoke the S-NSSAI authorization for the UE using Nnssaaf_NSSAA_RevocationNotification with the GPSI and S-NSSAI in the received AAA message. The callback URI of the notification for the AMF is derived via NRF as specified in TS 29.501 [62].
5.	If the UE is registered with the S-NSSAI in the Mapping Of Allowed NSSAI, the AMF updates the UE configuration to revoke the S-NSSAI from the current Allowed NSSAI, for any Access Type for which Network Slice Specific Authentication and Authorization had been successfully run on this S-NSSAI. The UE Configuration Update may include a request to Register if the AMF needs to be re-allocated. The AMF provides a new Allowed NSSAI to the UE by removing the S-NSSAI for which authorization has been revoked. The AMF provides new rejected NSSAIs to the UE including the S-NSSAI for which authorization has been revoked. If no S-NSSAI is left in Allowed NSSAI for an access after the revocation and a Default NSSAI exists that requires no Network Slice Specific Authentication or for which a Network Slice Specific Authentication did not previously fail over this access, then the AMF may provide a new Allowed NSSAI to the UE containing the Default NSSAI. If no S-NSSAI is left in Allowed NSSAI for an access after the revocation and no Default NSSAI can be provided to the UE in the Allowed NSSAI or a previous Network Slice Specific Authentication failed for the Default NSSAI over this access, then the AMF shall execute the Network-initiated Deregistration procedure for the access as described in clause 4.2.2.3.3 and it shall include in the explicit De-Registration Request message the list of Rejected S-NSSAIs, each of them with the appropriate rejection cause value. If there are PDU session(s) established that are associated with the revoked S-NSSAI, the AMF shall initiate the PDU Session Release procedure as specified in clause 4.3.4 to release the PDU sessions with the appropriate cause value.
	If the UE is registered but the S-NSSAI is not in the Mapping Of Allowed NSSAI, the AMF removes any status it may have kept of the corresponding S-NSSAI subject to Network Slice-Specific Authentication and Authorization in the UE context.
Clause:	Clause 4.3.5	4.3.5	Session continuity, service continuity and UP path management


4.3.5.1	Change of SSC mode 2 PDU Session Anchor with different PDU Sessions
The following procedure is triggered by SMF in order to change the PDU Session Anchor serving a PDU Session of SSC mode 2 for a UE when neither multi-homing nor UL CL applies to the PDU Session. This procedure releases the existing PDU Session associated with an old PDU Session Anchor (i.e. UPF1 in figure 4.3.5.1-1) and immediately establishes a new PDU Session with a new PDU Session Anchor (i.e. UPF2 in figure 4.3.5.1-1) to the same DN.

Figure 4.3.5.1-1: Change of SSC mode 2 PSA for a PDU Session
1.	The SMF determines that the serving UPF needs to be changed due to events that may benefit from such change.
1a. If the UPF (PSA) cannot connect to the target DNAI that SMF received from SM-PCF, the SMF invokes Nsmf_PDUSession_SMContextStatusNotify Request (target DNAI information) service operation to the AMF. The SMF also indicates the SMF selection is expected.
	The target DNAI information is used for SMF selection which can control UPF connecting to that DNAI at next PDU session establishment towards the same DNN and S-NSSAI. Due to it is for SMF selection, the AMF stores the target DNAI information received from SMF. The target DNAI information is not transferred outside, e.g. to support the UE context transfer between AMFs for AMF relocation.
2.	The PDU Session Release procedure is initiated as described in clause 4.3.4. The SMF sends an N1 SM Information to the UE via the AMF by invoking Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer as described in Step 3b of clause 4.3.4.2. The PDU Session Release Command message in N1 SM Information contains the PDU Session ID and Cause indicating that a PDU Session re-establishment to the same DN is required.
3.	Upon reception of PDU Session Release Command with Cause indicating that a PDU Session re-establishment to the same DN is required as sent in step 2, the UE generates a new PDU Session ID and initiates PDU Session Establishment procedure as described in clause 4.3.2.2.
	Then, the AMF selects an SMF as described in clause 6.4.2 of TS 23.501 [2] and the SMF can select a new UPF (i.e. UPF2) for the re-established PDU Session of SSC mode 2.
	If the AMF has received target DNAI information from old SMF (i.e. SMF1), for the PDU Session toward same DNN and S-NSSAI the AMF selects the SMF using the stored target DNAI information. The AMF includes the target DNAI in the Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Request and deletes the stored target DNAI information. The SMF selects the new PDU Session Anchor using the target DNAI.

4.3.5.2	Change of SSC mode 3 PDU Session Anchor with multiple PDU Sessions
The following procedure is triggered by SMF in order to change the PDU Session Anchor serving a PDU Session of SSC mode 3 for a UE. This procedure releases the existing PDU Session associated with an old PDU Session Anchor (i.e. UPF1 in figure 4.3.5.2-1) after having established a new PDU Session to the same DN with a new PDU Session Anchor (i.e. UPF2 in figure 4.3.5.2-1), which is controlled by the same SMF. The SMF may determine that a new SMF needs to be reallocated.

Figure 4.3.5.2-1: Change of SSC mode 3 PDU Session Anchor with multiple PDU Sessions
1.	The SMF determines that the serving UPF or the SMF needs to be changed. If the "Indication of application relocation possibility" attributes in the PCC rule indicates no DNAI change takes place once selected for this application, the SMF determines that the SMF can not be changed.
1a. If the UPF (PSA) cannot connect to the target DNAI(s) that SMF received from SM-PCF, the SMF invokes Nsmf_PDUSession_SMContextStatusNotify Request (target DNAI information) service operation to the AMF. The SMF also indicate the SMF selection is expected.
	If the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF (Figure 4.3.6.3-1) is enabled, the SMF includes in the Nsmf_PDUSession_SMContextStatusNotify Request the SM Context ID as a reference to the SM Context that includes AF Coordination Information stored in the SMF.
	The target DNAI information are used for SMF selection which can control UPF connecting to that DNAI at next PDU session establishment towards the same DNN and S-NSSAI. Due to it is for SMF selection, the AMF stores the target DNAI information received from SMF selection. The target DNAI information is not transferred outside, e.g. to support the UE context transfer between AMFs for AMF relocation.
2.	If the SMF had sent an early notification to the AF and the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration as specified in clause 4.3.6.3, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF waits for a notification response from the AF. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure. This is defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1.
	The SMF invokes the Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer (PDU Session ID, SMF Reallocation requested indication, N1 SM container (PDU Session Modification Command (Cause, PCO (PDU Session Address Lifetime value)))) where PDU Session ID indicates the existing PDU Session to be relocated and Cause indicates that a PDU Session re-establishment to the same DN is required.
	The SMF Reallocation requested indication indicates whether the SMF is requested to be reallocated.
	The PDU Session Address Lifetime value is delivered to the UE upper layers in PCO and indicates how long the network is willing to maintain the PDU Session. The SMF starts a PDU Session Release timer corresponding to the PDU Session Address Lifetime value.
3a.	The AMF forwards the NAS message to the UE. The UE can provide the release timer value to the upper layers if received in the PDU Session Modification Command.
3b.	The UE acknowledges the PDU Session Modification Command.
3c.	The AMF forwards the N1 SM container (PDU Session Modification Command ACK) received from the (R)AN to the SMF1 via Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext service operation.
3d.	The SMF1 replies with a Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext Response.
4.	If the UE receives PDU Session Modification Command, the UE may decide to initiate the PDU Session Establishment procedure described in clause 4.3.2.2, to the same DN with the following differences:
	In Step 1 of clause 4.3.2.2.1, according to the SSC mode, UE generates a new PDU Session ID and initiates the PDU Session Establishment Request using the new PDU Session ID. The new PDU Session ID is included as PDU Session ID in the NAS request message and the Old PDU Session ID which indicates the existing PDU Session to be released is also provided to AMF in the NAS request message.
	In Step 2 of clause 4.3.2.2.1, if SMF reallocation was requested in Step 2 of this clause, the AMF selects a different SMF. Otherwise, the AMF sends the Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Request to the same SMF serving the Old PDU Session ID.
	If target DNAI information has been received from old SMF (i.e. SMF1), for the PDU Session toward same DNN and S-NSSAI the AMF selects the new SMF using the stored target DNAI information. The AMF includes the target DNAI in the Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Request and deletes the stored target DNAI information. If the AMF has received the SM Context ID from the old SMF, the AMF includes the SM Context ID in the Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Request.
	In Step 3 of clause 4.3.2.2.1, if the SMF is not to be reallocated, the AMF include both PDU Session ID and Old PDU Session ID in Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Request. The SMF detects that the PDU Session establishment request is related to the trigger in step 2 based on the presence of an Old PDU Session ID in the Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Request.
	In Step 3 of clause 4.3.2.2.1, the SMF stores the new PDU Session ID and selects a new PDU Session Anchor (i.e. UPF2) for the new PDU Session.
	If the new SMF receives an SM Context ID in the Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Request, the new SMF retrieves the AF Coordination Information by sending a Nsmf_PDUSession_ContextRequest to the old SMF and indicates that "AF Coordination Information" part of 5G SM Context is requested.
	If the SMF receives a target DNAI in the Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Request, the SMF selects the new PDU Session Anchor using the target DNAI.
	If the AF Coordination Information in the Nsmf_PDUSession_ContextRequest Response includes a notification correlation id associated with an "uplink buffering" indication, the SMF may also indicate PSA2 to buffer the uplink data associated with the same notification correlation id in the PCC Rules.
	If the PCC Rules received from the PCF as in step 7b or step 9 in clause 4.3.2.2.1 indicate that a late notification is requested by the AF (directly or via NEF), the SMF sends a late notification to the AF before step 11 of clause 4.3.2.2.1 in Nsmf_EventExposure_Notify service operation, as in step 4a or step 4c in Figure 4.3.6.3-1 (directly or via NEF, respectively). The late notification contains the Source DNAI and the UE IP address in the Source DNAI included in the AF Coordination Information as received in the Nsmf_PDUSession_CreateSMContext Response from the old SMF.
	If the SMF received a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure. This is defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1. Otherwise the SMF continue the following procedures to activate the UP path of the new PDU Session. The SMF may also indicate PSA2 to stop buffering and start forwarding uplink data.
5.	After the new PDU Session is established the UE starts using the IP address/prefix associated with the new PDU Session for all new traffic and may also proactively move existing traffic flow (where possible) from the old PDU Session to the new PDU Session.
NOTE:	The mechanisms used by the UE to proactively move existing traffic flows from one IP address/prefix to another are outside the scope of 3GPP specifications.
6.	The old PDU Session is released as described in clause 4.3.4 either by the UE before the timer provided in step 3 expires (e.g. once the UE has consolidated all traffic on new PDU Session or if the session is no more needed) or by the SMF upon expiry of this timer.

4.3.5.3	Change of SSC mode 3 PDU Session Anchor with IPv6 Multi-homed PDU Session
Clause 4.3.5.3 describes a procedure for service continuity with SSC mode 3 that uses the multi-homed PDU Session described in clause 5.6.4.3 of TS 23.501 [2]. In this case the SMF prepares a new PDU Session Anchor first and then notifies the UE of the existence of a new IP prefix, as depicted in figure 4.3.5.3-1. This procedure is applicable only to PDU Sessions of IPv6 type.

Figure 4.3.5.3-1: Change of PDU Session Anchor with IPv6 Multi homed PDU Session
The UE has an established PDU Session with the PDU Session Anchor (i.e. UPF1 in Figure 4.3.5.3-1). The PDU Session's User Plane involves at least the (R)AN and the PDU Session Anchor.
1.	At some point the SMF decides to allocate the PDU Session with a new PDU Session Anchor.
2.	The SMF selects a new UPF and using N4 configures the UPF as a new PDU Session Anchor (i.e. UPF2 in Figure 4.3.5.3-1) of the multi-homed PDU Session. In the process a new IPv6 prefix (IP@2) is allocated for the PDU Session. If the PCF has subscribed to the IP allocation/release event, the SMF performs a Session Management Policy Modification procedure as defined in clause 4.16.5 to provide the new allocated IPv6 prefix to the PCF. The PCF invokes Nbsf_Management_Update service operation to register the tuple (IPv6 prefix, PCF id) for the PDU session identified by (SUPI, DNN, S-NSSAI) in the BSF.
	If the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends an early notification to the AF after the new UPF (new PSA) is selected and waits for a notification response from the AF. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure. This is further defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1.
3.	The SMF selects a Branching Point (BP) UPF as described in Clause of 6.3.3 of TS 23.501 [2]. The selection of BP UPF may consider the location of UPF1 and UPF2 to ensure a suitable location of the BP UPF relative to the UPF1 and the UPF2.
NOTE 1:	If BP UPF is co-located with one of PDU Session Anchors, steps between SMF and BP UPF can be skipped.
4.	The SMF configures via N4 the UPF selected in step 3 (BP UPF in Figure 4.3.5.3-1) as a Branching Point for the multi-homed PDU Session. It provides the Branching Point with the necessary UL traffic forwarding rules (related with the prefix of the IPv6 source address of UL traffic). Also, the SMF provides AN Tunnel Info for N3 tunnel setup and CN Tunnel Info for N9 tunnel setup to the BP UPF and obtains CN Tunnel Info from the BP UPF.
5-6. The SMF performs N4 Session Modification procedure with PSAs. During this procedure, the SMF provides CN Tunnel Info received from the BP UPF to set up an N9 tunnel between BP and PSAs. The SMF may also indicate local PSA2 to buffer the uplink data.
7.	The SMF invokes the Namf_Communication_N1N2MessageTransfer service operation containing N2 SM Information with CN Tunnel Info for the N3 tunnel setup.
8.	The AMF sends an N2 Request including N2 SM Information received from the SMF to the (R)AN. The (R)AN acknowledges to the AMF with an N2 Response.
9a.	The AMF carries the N2 Response sent by the (R)AN to the SMF by invoking the Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext service operation.
9b.	The SMF responds to Nsmf_PDUSession_UpdateSMContext service operation from the AMF.
10-11.	If the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration as specified in clause 4.3.6.3, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" is included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends a late notification to the AF and waits for a notification response from the AF. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure. This is further defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1.
	The SMF notifies the UE of the availability of the new IP prefix. This is performed using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4861 [6]). The SMF sends a Router Advertisement to the UE via the new PSA with a new prefix (IP@2) and sends another Router Advertisement to the UE via the old PSA with the old prefix (IP@1) and zero value in the preferred lifetime field and a value in the valid lifetime field according to RFC 4862 [8]. The UE shall update the valid lifetime of the old prefix (IP@1) to the signalled value regardless of the remaining lifetime. The valid lifetime value indicates the time how long the SMF is willing to keep the old prefix. The valid lifetime value may be decided by SMF based on local configuration.
	The UE starts using IP@2 for all new traffic and may also proactively move existing traffic flow (where possible) from IP@1 to IP@2.
NOTE 2:	The mechanisms used by the UE to proactively move existing traffic flows from one IP prefix to another are outside the scope of 3GPP specifications.
12.	After the timer expires, the SMF releases the UE's old IPv6 prefix (IP@1). At this point the UE implicitly releases the old IP prefix. The SMF sends an N4 Session Modification Request to the BP to release UP resource for N9 tunnel between the BP and old PSA.
13.	The SMF releases the old PDU Session context with the old PDU Session Anchor (UPF1 in Figure 4.3.5.3-1). If the PCF has subscribed to the IP allocation/release event, the SMF performs a Session Management Policy Modification procedure as defined in clause 4.16.5 to notify the PCF of the IPv6 prefix release. The PCF shall invoke Nbsf_Management_Update service operation to remove the tuple (IPv6prefix, PCF id) for the PDU session identified by (SUPI, DNN,S-NSSAI) in BSF.
14-18.	The SMF may optionally release the Branching Point from the User Plane path. In step 14, the SMF may also indicate PSA2 to stop buffering and start forwarding uplink data.

4.3.5.4	Addition of additional PDU Session Anchor and Branching Point or UL CL
Clause 4.3.5.4 describes a procedure to add a PDU Session Anchor and a Branching Point or UL CL for an established PDU Session.

Figure 4.3.5.4-1: Addition of additional PDU Session Anchor and Branching Point or UL CL
1.	UE has an established PDU Session with a UPF including the PDU Session Anchor 1 (PSA1 in Figure 4.3.5.4-1). The PDU Session User Plane involves at least the (R)AN and the PDU Session Anchor 1.
2.	At some point the SMF decides to establish a new PDU Session Anchor e.g. due to UE mobility, new flow detection. The SMF selects a UPF and using N4 establish the new PDU Session Anchor 2 (PSA2 in Figure 4.3.5.4-1) of the PDU Session. In the case of IPv6 multi-homing PDU Session, the SMF also ensures that a new IPv6 prefix corresponding to PSA2 is allocated and if the PCF has subscribed to the IP allocation/release event, the SMF performs the Session Management Policy Modification procedure as defined in clause 4.16.5 to provide the new allocated IPv6 prefix to the PCF.
	If the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" is included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends an early notification to the AF after new PSA (PSA2 in Figure 4.3.5.4-1) is selected and waits for a notification response from the AF before configuring the new PSA. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure.
3.	The SMF selects a UPF and using N4 establish the Branching Point (in the case of IPv6 multi-homing) or a UL CL for the PDU Session. It provides the necessary uplink forwarding rules towards PSA1 and PSA2 including the PSA1 CN Tunnel Info and the PSA2 CN Tunnel Info. In addition, the AN Tunnel Info is provided for downlink forwarding. In the case of IPv6 multi-homing, the SMF also provides traffic filters for the IPv6 prefixes corresponding to PSA1 and PSA2 indicating what traffic shall be forwarded towards PSA1 and PSA2 respectively.
	In the case of UL CL, the SMF provides traffic filters indicating what traffic shall be forwarded towards PSA1 and PSA2 respectively. If the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" is included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends a late notification to the AF and waits for a notification response from the AF before configuring the UL CL. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure.
NOTE 1:	If the Branching Point or UL CL and the PSA2 are co-located in a single UPF then steps 2 and 3 can be merged. If a Branching Point is already allocated, step 3 is skipped.
4.	The SMF updates the PSA1 via N4. It provides the Branching Point or UL CL CN Tunnel Info for the downlink traffic.
NOTE 2:	If the Branching Point or UL CL and the PSA1 are co-located in a single UPF then steps 3 and 4 can be merged.
5.	The SMF updates PSA2 via N4. It provides the Branching Point or UL CL CN Tunnel Info for down-link traffic.
NOTE 3:	If the Branching Point or UL CL and the PSA2 are co-located in a single UPF then step 5 is not needed.
6. The SMF updates (R)AN via N2 SM information over N11. It provides the new CN Tunnel Info corresponding to the UPF (Branching Point or UL CL). In the case of UL CL, if there is an existing UPF between the (R)AN and new inserted UL CL, the SMF updates the existing UPF via N4 instead of updating the (R)AN.
7.	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing, the SMF notifies the UE of the availability of the new IP prefix @ PSA2. This is performed using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4861 [6]). Also, the SMF sends IPv6 multi-homed routing rule along with the IPv6 prefix to the UE using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4191 [21]) as described in clause 5.8.2.2.2 of TS 23.501 [2].
	If the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends a late notification to the AF and waits for a notification response from the AF before sending the new IP prefix to the UE. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure.
8.	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing, the SMF may re-configure the UE for the original IP prefix @ PSA1,i.e. SMF sends IPv6 multi-homed routing rule along with the IPv6 prefix to the UE using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4191 [21]) as described in clause 5.8.2.2.2 of TS 23.501 [2].

4.3.5.5	Removal of additional PDU Session Anchor and Branching Point or UL CL
Clause 4.3.5.5 describes a procedure to remove a PDU Session Anchor and (optionally) remove Branching Point or UL CL for an established PDU Session.

Figure 4.3.5.5-1: Removal of additional PDU Session Anchor and Branching Point or UL CL
1.	UE has an established PDU Session with a UPF including the Branching Point or UL CL, the PDU Session Anchor 1 (PSA1 in Figure 4.3.5.5-1) and the PDU Session Anchor 2 (PSA2 in Figure 4.3.5.5-1).
	At some point the SMF decides to remove the PDU Session Anchor 1 e.g. due to UE mobility, flow terminated.
2.	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing, the SMF notifies the UE to stop using the IPv6 prefix corresponding to PSA1. This is performed by IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4861 [6] and RFC 4862 [8]). Also, the SMF sends IPv6 multi-homed routing rule along with the IPv6 prefix corresponding to PSA2 to the UE as described in clause 5.8.2.2.2 of TS 23.501 [2]. Based on the information provided in the Router Advertisement, the UE starts using the IPv6 prefix (corresponding to PSA2) for all the traffic.
4.	If the Branching Point or UL CL is to be released, the SMF updates the (R)AN with the PSA2 CN Tunnel Info. In the case of UL CL, if there is an existing UPF between the (R)AN and the UL CL to be removed, the SMF updates the existing UPF via N4 instead of updating the (R)AN.
5.	If the Branching Point or UL CL is to be released, the SMF updates via N4 the PSA2 providing the AN Tunnel Info. In the case of UL CL, if there is an existing UPF between the (R)AN and the UL CL to be removed, the SMF updates the PSA2 providing the UPF CN tunnel Info.
6.	The SMF releases via N4 the PSA1. In the case of IPv6 multi-homing, the SMF also releases the corresponding IPv6 prefix and if the PCF has subscribed to the IP allocation/release event, the SMF performs the Session Management Policy Modification procedure as defined in clause 4.16.5 to notify the PCF of the IPv6 prefix release.
7.	If steps 4 and 5 were executed, the SMF releases the Branching Point / UL CL.

4.3.5.6	Change of additional PDU Session Anchor for IPv6 multi-homing or UL CL
The following procedure is triggered by an SMF when the SMF needs to modify IPv6 multi-homing or UL CL rule (i.e. traffic filter in the Branching Point or the UL CL) in order to move the some or whole traffic flows of the existing additional PDU Session Anchor which was established by the IPv6 multi-homing or the UL CL operations (i.e. PSA1 in figure 4.3.5.6-1) to a new additional PDU Session Anchor (i.e. PSA2 in figure 4.3.5.6-1) which is established under the same Branching Point or UL CL for a UE where the UE already has a PDU Session Anchor which was established before the event of Branching Point or UL CL insertion (i.e. PSA0 in figure 4.3.5.6-1). This procedure establishes a new additional PDU Session Anchor (i.e. PSA2) and conditionally releases the existing additional PDU Session Anchor (i.e. PSA1), while modifying IPv6 multi-homing or UL CL rule in the same Branching Point or UL CL under controlled by the same SMF.

Figure 4.3.5.6-1: Change of additional PSA for a PDU Session in IPv6 multi-homing or UL CL case
1.	The SMF decides to change one additional PSA of a PDU Session with IPv6 multi-homing or UL CL, due to events that may benefit from such change or upon request from an Application Function.
2.	If the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends an early notification to the AF after PSA2 is selected and waits for a notification response from the AF before configuring the PSA2. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure. This is defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1.
	The SMF sends an N4 Session Establishment Request to PSA2 and provides the tunnel ID of Branching Point or UL CL, Packet detection, enforcement and reporting rules to be installed on the PSA2 for this PDU Session. The SMF may also indicate local PSA2 to buffer the uplink data.
	The PSA2 acknowledges by sending an N4 Session Establishment Response. The tunnel ID of PSA2 is provided to the SMF in this step.
	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing PDU Session, a new IPv6 prefix corresponding to PSA2 is allocated (by the SMF or by the UPF depending on the deployment) and if the PCF has subscribed to the IP allocation/release event, the SMF performs the Session Management Policy Modification Procedure as defined in clause 4.16.5 to provide the new allocated IPv6 prefix to the PCF.
3a.	In the case of PDU session with UL CL, if the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends a late notification to the AF and waits for a notification response from the AF. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure. This is further defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1.
	The SMF sends an N4 Session Modification Request to the Branching Point or UL CL to update the UL traffic filter according to new allocated IPv6 prefix allocated to PSA 2 or the UL CL rules regarding to the traffic flows that the SMF tries to move from PSA1 to PSA2. The N4 Session Modification Request message contains the identifications of traffic filter that needs to be updated and the tunnel ID of PSA2.
NOTE:	The identification of a traffic filter can be either the index of the traffic filter, or a single value of the information field in traffic filter (e.g. the tunnel ID of next hop), or a combination value of some information field in the traffic filter (e.g. the tunnel ID of next hop with source port number).
3b.	The Branching Point or the UL CL acknowledges by N4 Session Modification Response the Branching Point or when the UL CL successfully updates all the traffic filters that the SMF requests to modify.
3c.	The SMF may also indicate PSA2 to stop buffering and start forwarding uplink data.
4.	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing PDU Session, if the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends a late notification to the AF and waits for a notification response from the AF. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure. This is further defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1.
	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing PDU Session, The SMF notifies the UE of the availability of the new IP prefix @ PSA2. This is performed using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4861 [6]). Also, the SMF sends IPv6 multi-homed routing rule along with the IPv6 prefix to the UE using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4191 [21]) as described in clause 5.8.2.2.2 of TS 23.501 [2]. The SMF may also indicate PSA2 to stop buffering and start forwarding uplink data.
5.	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing PDU Session, The SMF may re-configure the UE for the original IP prefix @ PSA0,i.e. SMF sends IPv6 multi-homed routing rule along with the IPv6 prefix to the UE using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4191 [21]) as described in clause 5.8.2.2.2 of TS 23.501 [2].
6.	Step 6 occurs only if the Branching Point or UL CL does not have any traffic filter on the PDU Session which forwards a traffic flow to PSA1.
6a.	The SMF sends an N4 Session Release Request with N4 session ID to PSA1. The PSA1 shall release all tunnel resources and contexts associated with the N4 session.
6b.	PSA1 sends an N4 Session Release Response with N4 session ID to the SMF at the same moment that PSA1 successfully releases all tunnel resources and contexts associated with the N4 session.

4.3.5.7	Simultaneous change of Branching Point or UL CL and additional PSA for a PDU Session
Simultaneous change of UL CL or Branching Point and additional PSA can be performed after Xn based handover, N2 based handover and Service Request procedures.
The following procedure is triggered by SMF in order to change the Branching Point or the UL CL and additional PSA serving a PDU Session for a UE.

Figure 4.3.5.7-1: Simultaneous change of Branching Point or UL CL and additional PSA for a PDU Session
UE has an established PDU Session with a UPF including the PDU Session Anchor (Remote UPF). The PDU Session user plane involves at least the Source (R)AN, Source Branching Point or Source UL CL, local Source UPF (PSA2) and the Remote UPF (PDU Session Anchor, PSA1), where Source Branching Point or Source UL CL and PSA2 can be co-located.
1.	At some point SMF decides to change the Branching Point or the UL CL (e.g. due to UE mobility).
2.	The SMF selects a local Target UPF (PSA3) and using N4 establishes the local Target UPF for the PDU Session.
	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing PDU Session, a new IPv6 prefix corresponding to PSA3 is allocated (by the SMF or by the UPF depending on the deployment) and if the PCF has subscribed to the IP allocation/release event, the SMF performs the Session Management Policy Modification procedure as defined in clause 4.16.5 to provide the new allocated IPv6 prefix to the PCF.
	The SMF may send an Early notification to the AF after PSA3 is selected. If the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration as specified in clause 4.3.6.3, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF waits for a notification response from the AF before configuring the PSA3. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure. This is defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1.
3.	The SMF selects a UPF and using N4 establishes the Target Branching Point or Target UL CL for the PDU Session. SMF provides the necessary uplink forwarding rules towards the PSA3 and PSA1 including the Tunnel Info for each UPF. If session continuity upon UL CL relocation is used, the SMF also uses N4 to establish an N9 forwarding tunnel between the Source UL CL and Target UL CL, including the Tunnel Info for each UPF. In addition, the AN Tunnel Info to target (R)AN is provided for downlink forwarding. In the case of UL CL, the SMF provides traffic filters indicating what traffic shall be forwarded towards PSA3, PSA1 and Source UL CL, respectively. In the case of IPv6 multi-homing, the SMF also provides traffic filters for the IPv6 prefixes corresponding to PSA3 and PSA1 indicating what traffic shall be forwarded towards PSA3 and PSA1 respectively. Target Branching Point or Target UL CL provides the CN Tunnel Info for downlink traffic.
NOTE 1:	If the Target Branching Point or Target UL CL and the PSA3 are co-located in a single UPF then steps 2 and 3 can be merged.
NOTE 2:	When session continuity upon UL CL relocation is used, the downlink traffic at this point goes through Source UL CL, Target UL CL and Target (R)AN.
4.	The SMF updates the PSA1 via N4. It provides the PDU Session CN Tunnel Info for the downlink traffic.
5.	The SMF updates the PSA3 via N4. It provides the CN Tunnel Info for downlink traffic. The SMF may also indicate PSA3 to buffer uplink data.
NOTE 3:	If the Target Branching Point or the Target UL CL and the PSA3 are co-located in a single UPF then step 5 is not needed.
6.	In the case of PDU session with UL CL, if the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends a late notification to the AF and waits for a notification response from the AF as described in step 9. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure and remove the Target Branching Point or Target UL CL and PSA3. This is further defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1.
	The SMF updates (R)AN via N2 SM information over N11. It provides the new CN Tunnel Info corresponding to the Target Branching Point or the Target UL CL. If there is an existing UPF between the Target (R)AN and Target Branching Point or Target UL CL, the SMF updates the existing UPF via N4 instead of updating the (R)AN.
NOTE 4:	When session continuity upon UL CL relocation is used, the uplink traffic destined to PSA2 at this point goes through Target (R)AN, Target UL CL and Source UL CL.
7.	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing PDU Session, if the runtime coordination between 5GC and AF is enabled based on local configuration, according to the indication of "AF acknowledgment to be expected" included in AF subscription to SMF events, the SMF sends a late notification to the AF and waits for a notification response from the AF as described in step 9. If the SMF receives a negative notification response from the AF, the SMF may stop the procedure. This is further defined in Figure 4.3.6.3-1.
	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing, the SMF notifies the UE of the availability of the new IP prefix @ PSA3. This is performed using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4861 [6]). Also, the SMF sends IPv6 multi-homed routing rule along with the IPv6 prefix to the UE using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4191 [21]) as described in clause 5.8.2.2.2 of TS 23.501 [2].
8.	In the case of IPv6 multi-homing, the SMF may re-configure the UE for the original IP prefix @ PSA1, i.e. SMF sends IPv6 multi-homed routing rule along with the IPv6 prefix to the UE using an IPv6 Router Advertisement message (RFC 4191 [21]) as described in clause 5.8.2.2.2 of TS 23.501 [2].
9.	The SMF sends a Late Notification to the AF indicating a change of DNAI as described in clause 4.3.6.3. In cases where target local DN is associated with another AF instance, SMF also sends notification to target AF as described in 4.3.6.3 and cancels any future notification message to source AF as it is no longer involved. The SMF may also indicate PSA3 to stop buffering and start forwarding uplink data based on the positive response for the Late Notification.
NOTE 5:	The message can include routing information to the application located in the target local DN. Alternatively the routing information to the application located in the target local DN can be determined by the AF based on the new DNAI, in which case the AF can invoke the AF triggered influence on traffic routing procedure targeting single UE as described in clause 4.3.6.4, which assists the SMF in generation of the routing rule on the Target UL CL towards PSA3 (i.e. towards the application located in the target local DN). It is up to network configuration whether the routing information to the application located in the target local DN is configured in the SMF or in the AF.
NOTE 6:	When session continuity upon UL CL relocation is used the AF can also trigger mechanisms that are out of the scope of this specification (e.g. IP-level or HTTP-level redirection) by which the traffic is redirected towards the application in the target local DN. Based on this redirection the UE starts using a new destination IP address which leads the Target UL CL to force the traffic towards PSA3.
10.	When session continuity upon UL CL relocation is used, detection of no active traffic over the N9 forwarding tunnel is performed during a time interval provisioned by SMF for User Plane inactivity report in order to release the N9 forwarding tunnel. The detection can be done by Source UL CL, which notifies the SMF of no active traffic over the N9 forwarding tunnel.
NOTE 7:	It is up to network configuration whether the detection of no active traffic is performed by the Source UL CL or the Target UL CL. As an alternative to the detection of no active traffic, the AF can send an explicit notification to the SMF when traffic to/from this UE ceases to exist, leading the SMF to release the Source UL CL and the Source UPF (PSA2).
11.	The SMF releases via N4 the PSA2.
12.	The SMF releases the Source Branching Point or the Source UL CL.
NOTE 8:	If the Source Branching Point or UL CL and the PSA2 are co-located in a single UPF then steps 11 and 12 can be merged.

4.3.5.8	Ethernet PDU Session Anchor Relocation
This procedure allows for Ethernet PDU Sessions to change the PDU Session Anchor (PSA) while the session remains set up. Originally the Ethernet PDU Session goes via the Source UPF acting as the PSA. The Ethernet context which contains all Ethernet specific information including the MAC address of the UE and possibly its VLAN tag(s) is reported from the Source PSA UPF to the SMF. It is possible to report multiple MAC addresses (with their VLAN tag(s)) if these are reachable via the UE.
The SMF determines whether and when a serving PDU Session anchor for an Ethernet PDU Session needs to be changed and selects the Target PSA UPF, establishes the N4 session at the Target PSA UPF. The information within the Ethernet context is sent to the Target UPF. Based on the information in the Ethernet context, the Target PSA UPF may take action to update the Ethernet forwarding in the data network.

Figure 4.3.5.8-1: Ethernet PDU Session Anchor Relocation
Initially, the Ethernet PDU Session is established with the user data going via the Source UPF. The Source UPF acts as the PSA.
1.	The Source UPF reports the Ethernet context which contains all Ethernet specific information including the MAC address of the UE and possibly its VLAN tag(s) that the UPF has learned from the UE side to the SMF. In the case of any changes in the Ethernet context, the change is updated to the SMF so that the SMF maintains an up-to-date state of the Ethernet context. This signalling is realized based on N4 reporting.
2.	The UPF's report is acknowledged.
3-5. In the case of handover, the RAN handover preparation and execution is followed by path switch signalling to the AMF and corresponding signalling to SMF, as defined in clause 4.9.1.2.
6.	The SMF decides that the PSA is to be changed for the Ethernet PDU Session and selects the Target UPF that will act as the new PSA. The decision may be triggered by a mobility event, such as receiving the message in step 5.
7.	The Target UPF N4 session is established. The SMF provides the N3 tunnel endpoint used by RAN.
8.	The establishment of the new N4 session is acknowledged from the Target UPF to the SMF. The UPF provides its N3 tunnel endpoint.
9-10.	In the case of handover, the SMF signals to the RAN via the AMF to provide the Path Switch Request Ack, which includes the update of the uplink N3 tunnel endpoint to the target UPF. This signalling is defined in clause 4.9.1.2. In steps 9-10, an indication is sent from the SMF via the AMF to the RAN node indicating that the RAN node should not expect to receive an end marker packet. The RAN node may skip trying to reorder the downlink packets.
11-12.	If there is no handover and the UE is in connected mode, the SMF sends PDU Session Modify Request message to the RAN via the AMF, which includes the update of the uplink N3 tunnel endpoint to the target UPF. The RAN acknowledges the message. The RAN node does not need to reorder the downlink packets.
NOTE 1:	Due to the change in the end to end path, packet re-ordering can occur both for the handover and no handover cases. If necessary, upper layer protocols can ensure in sequence delivery.
	After steps 9-10 or 11-12, uplink Ethernet frames pass via the target UPF. Downlink Ethernet frames may continue to be delivered from the source UPF to the RAN node. In the case of handover, the Ethernet frames are forwarded from the source RAN node to the target RAN node.
13-14.	The SMF sends an N4 Session Modification Request to the Target UPF which includes the information in Ethernet context (i.e. MAC address and VLAN tag(s)) and a trigger for updating the Ethernet forwarding (next step). The Target UPF acknowledges by an N4 Session Modification Response.
15.	The Target UPF may assist in the update of Ethernet forwarding tables of Ethernet switches in the DN via a variety of mechanisms, the use of which are specific to the DN and the specification of which are out-of-scope for 3GPP.
NOTE 2:	The UPF acting as a switch in the DN, can for example issue a Gratuitous ARP (GARP) containing the MAC address(es) of the UE that has switched to the new anchor, or the UPF can send an unsolicited Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP) Neighbor Advertisement message indicating the UE MAC addresses, or the UPF can generate a uplink Ethernet frame with the UE's MAC addresses as source MAC addresses (and possibly its VLAN tag(s)) and configurable payload which will be dropped by endhosts, or the UPF can send another message or Ethernet frame compatible with DN protocols.
	In the case of a central controller in the Ethernet network which sets the forwarding tables, the central controller can be instructed that the given MAC address is reachable at the new location.
	When multiple MAC addresses are present in the Ethernet context, the update of the Ethernet forwarding is performed for each MAC address.
16.	The N4 session is released at the Source UPF. The source UPF may wait for a configurable period before it stops delivering downlink Ethernet frames for the given PDU Session.
17.	The N4 session release is acknowledged from the Source UPF to the SMF.