5.3.8.2.1	UE-initiated Detach procedure for E-UTRAN
Figure 5.3.8.2-1 shows the case when UE camps on E-UTRAN and Detach Request is sent to MME.

Figure 5.3.8.2-1: UE-Initiated Detach Procedure - UE camping on E-UTRAN
NOTE 1:	For a PMIP-based S5/S8, procedure steps (A) are defined in TS 23.402 [2]. Steps 6, 7 and 8 concern GTP based S5/S8
1.	The UE sends NAS message Detach Request (GUTI, Switch Off) to the MME. This NAS message is used to trigger the establishment of the S1 connection if the UE was in ECM-IDLE mode. Switch Off indicates whether detach is due to a switch off situation or not. The eNodeB forwards this NAS message to the MME along with the TAI+ECGI of the cell which the UE is using.
	If the MME receives a Detach Request via a CSG cell with Switch Off parameter indicating that detach is not due to a switch off situation, and the CSG subscription for this CSG ID and associated PLMN is absent or expired, the MME shall trigger a MME-initiated Detach procedure as specified in clause 5.3.8.3.
	If Dual Connectivity is active for the UE, the PSCell ID shall be included in the Uplink NAS Transport that carries the Detach Request message.
NOTE 2:	Security procedures may be invoked if the NAS message is used to establish the S1 connection.
NOTE 3:	For emergency attached or RLOS attached UEs that were not successfully authenticated, security procedures are not performed.
2.	If the UE has no activated PDN connection, then steps 2 to 10 are not executed. If the PLMN has configured secondary RAT usage data reporting, the MME shall wait for step 11, if applicable, and shall perform step 12 before step 2 onwards. For any PDN connection to the SCEF, the MME indicates to the SCEF that the PDN connection for the UE is no longer available according to TS 23.682 [74] and steps 2 to 10 are not executed. For PDN connections to the P-GW, the active EPS Bearers in the Serving GW regarding this particular UE are deactivated by the MME sending Delete Session Request (LBI, User Location Information (ECGI), Secondary RAT usage data, PSCell ID) per PDN connection to the Serving GW. If ISR is activated, then the Serving GW shall not release the Control Plane TEID allocated for MME/SGSN until it receives the Delete Session Request message in step 5. If the UE Time Zone has changed, the MME includes the UE Time Zone IE in this message. If Secondary RAT usage data report was received from RAN, the MME includes this in the Delete Session Request message. If MME has received PSCell ID from eNodeB, the MME includes it in Delete Session Request.
3.	When the S-GW receives the first Delete Session Request message from the MME or SGSN in ISR activated state, the Serving GW deactivates ISR, releases the related EPS Bearer context information and responds with Delete Session Response (Cause).
	When the S-GW receives the Delete Session Request message from the MME or SGSN in ISR deactivated state, the Serving GW releases the related EPS Bearer context information and jumps to step 6 by sending a Delete Session Request (LBI) message per PDN connection to the PDN GW. After step 7 the Serving GW responds back to the MME/SGSN with the Delete Session Response (Cause and, optionally, APN Rate Control Status according to clause 4.7.7.3) message.
4.	If ISR is activated, MME sends Detach Indication (Cause) message to the associated SGSN. The Cause indicates complete detach.
5.	The active PDP contexts in the Serving GW regarding this particular UE are deactivated by the SGSN sending Delete Session Request (LBI, CGI/SAI) per PDN connection to the Serving GW. If the UE Time Zone has changed, the SGSN includes the UE Time Zone IE in this message.
6.	If ISR is activated, Serving GW deactivates ISR. If ISR is not activated in the Serving GW, the Serving GW sends Delete Session Request (LBI, User Location Information (ECGI or CGI/SAI), Secondary RAT usage data) per PDN connection to the PDN GW. If ISR is not activated, this step shall be triggered by step 2. This message indicates that all bearers belonging to that PDN connection shall be released. If the MME and/or SGSN sends UE's Location Information, and/or UE Time Zone Information, and/or Secondary RAT usage data in step 2 and/or step 5, the S-GW includes the User Location Information, and/or UE Time Zone, and/or User CSG Information with the least age in this message and/or Secondary RAT usage data information.
7.	The PDN GW acknowledges with Delete Session Response (Cause and, optionally, APN Rate Control Status according to clause 4.7.7.3).
8.	The PDN GW employs a PCEF initiated IP-CAN Session Termination Procedure as defined in TS 23.203 [6] with the PCRF to indicate to the PCRF that EPS Bearer is released if PCRF is applied in the network. If requested by the PCRF the PDN GW indicates User Location Information and/or UE Time Zone Information to the PCRF as defined in TS 23.203 [6].
9.	The Serving GW acknowledges with Delete Session Response (Cause and, optionally, APN Rate Control Status).
10.	The SGSN sends Detach Acknowledge message to the MME (optionally APN Rate Control Status). If received, the MME stores the APN Rate Control Status in the MM context.
11.	If Switch Off indicates that detach is not due to a switch off situation, the MME sends a Detach Accept to the UE.
12.	The MME releases the S1-MME signalling connection for the UE by sending S1 Release Command to the eNodeB with Cause set to Detach. The details of this step are covered in the "S1 Release Procedure", as described in clause 5.3.5.
NOTE 4:	In the "S1 Release Procedure", if Dual Connectivity was active at the time of the release, the eNodeB includes the PSCell ID.
Clause:	Clause 5.3.8.3	5.3.8.3	MME-initiated Detach procedure
The MME-Initiated Detach procedure when initiated by the MME is illustrated in Figure 5.3.8.3-1.
This procedure may be also used as part of the SIPTO function when the MME determines that GW relocation is desirable for all PDN connection(s) serving SIPTO-allowed APNs. The MME initiates the "explicit detach with reattach required" procedure and the UE should then re-establish those PDN connections for the same APN(s).

Figure 5.3.8.3-1: MME-Initiated Detach Procedure
NOTE 1:	For a PMIP-based S5/S8, procedure steps (A) are defined in TS 23.402 [2]. Steps 3, 4 and 5 concern GTP based S5/S8.
NOTE 2:	Procedure steps (B) are used by the procedure steps (E) in clause 5.3.2.1.
1.	The MME initiated detach procedure is either explicit (e.g. by O&M intervention) or implicit. The MME may implicitly detach a UE, if it has not had communication with UE for a long period of time. The MME does not send the Detach Request (Detach Type) message to the UE for implicit detach. The implicit detach is local to the MME, i.e. an SGSN registration will not be detached. If the UE is in ECM-CONNNECTED state the MME may explicitly detach the UE by sending a Detach Request message to the UE. The Detach Type may be set to re-attach in which case the UE should re-attach at the end of the detach process. If the UE is in ECM-IDLE state the MME pages the UE.
	For emergency attached UEs, MME initiated implicit detach procedures are based on an inactivity timeout specific to emergency.
	If this Detach procedure is due to the UE's Detach Request via a CSG cell which the UE is not allowed to access, i.e. the CSG subscription for this CSG ID and associated PLMN is absent or expired, the MME shall send a Detach Request to UE with an appropriate cause indicating the UE is not allowed to access this CSG.
	In the case of satellite access for Cellular IoT, the MME initiates detach procedure if it detects that the UE's registered PLMN is not allowed to operate in the present UE location (see clause 4.13.4). In this case, the MME shall include in the Detach Request message a suitable cause value.
	The MME may provide S&F Monitoring List to the UE (see clause 4.13.9.1).
2.	If the UE has no activated PDN connection, then steps 2 to 10 are not executed. If the PLMN has configured secondary RAT usage reporting, the MME shall wait for step 11, if applicable, and perform step 12 before step 2 onwards. For any PDN connections to the SCEF, the MME indicates to the SCEF that the PDN connection for the UE is no longer available according to TS 23.682 [74] and steps 2 to 10 are not executed. For PDN connections to the P-GW, any EPS Bearer Context information in the Serving GW regarding this particular UE and related to the MME are deactivated by the MME sending Delete Session Request (LBI, User Location Information (ECGI), NAS Release Cause if available, Secondary RAT usage data, PSCell ID) message per PDN connection to the Serving GW. If the UE Time Zone has changed, the MME includes the UE Time Zone IE in this message. NAS Release Cause is only sent by the MME to the PDN GW if this is permitted according to MME operator's policy. If Secondary RAT usage data report was received from the RAN, the MME includes this in the Delete Session Request message. If MME has received PSCell ID from eNodeB, the MME includes it in Delete Session Request.
3.	When the S-GW receives the first Delete Session Request message from the MME or SGSN in ISR activated state, the Serving GW deactivates ISR, releases the related EPS Bearer context information and responds with Delete Session Response (Cause).
	When the S-GW receives the Delete Session Request message from the MME or SGSN in ISR deactivated state, the Serving GW releases the related EPS Bearer context information and jumps to step 6 by sending a Delete Session Request (LBI) message to the PDN GW. After step 7 the Serving GW responds back to the MME/SGSN with the Delete Session Response (Cause and, optionally, APN Rate Control Status according to clause 4.7.7.3) message.
4.	If ISR is activated, MME sends Detach Notification (Cause) message to the associated SGSN. The cause indicates whether it is a local or complete detach.
5.	If cause indicates complete detach then the SGSN sends a Delete Session Request (LBI, CGI/SAI) message per PDN connection to the Serving GW. If Cause indicates local detach then SGSN deactivates ISR and steps 5 to 9 shall be skipped. If the UE Time Zone has changed, the SGSN includes the UE Time Zone IE in this message.
6.	If ISR is activated, Serving GW deactivates ISR.
	If ISR is not activated and the Serving GW received one or several Delete Bearer Request message(s) from SGSN in step 2, the Serving GW sends a Delete Session Request (LBI, User Location Information (ECGI or CGI/SAI), NAS Release Cause if available, Secondary RAT usage data) message for each associated PDN connection to the PDN GW. NAS Release Cause is the one received in the Delete Session Request from the MME. This message indicates that all bearers belonging to that PDN connection shall be released.
	If the MME and/or SGSN send(s) UE's Location Information, and/or UE Time Zone and/or Secondary RAT usage data in step 2 and/or step 5, the S-GW includes the User Location Information, and/or UE Time Zone Information with the least age in this message and/or Secondary RAT usage data.
7.	The PDN GW acknowledges with Delete Session Response (Cause and, optionally, APN Rate Control Status according to clause 4.7.7.3) message.
8.	The PDN GW employs an IP-CAN Session Termination procedure as defined in TS 23.203 [6] with the PCRF to indicate to the PCRF that the EPS Bearer(s) are released if a PCRF is configured. If requested by the PCRF the PDN GW indicates User Location Information and/or UE Time Zone Information and NAS Release Cause (if available) to the PCRF as defined in TS 23.203 [6].
9.	The Serving GW acknowledges with Delete Session Response (Cause, APN Rate Control Status) message.
10.	The SGSN sends Detach Acknowledge message to the MME (APN Rate Control Status). The MME stores the APN Rate Control Status in the MM context.
11.	If the UE receives the Detach Request message from the MME in the step 1, the UE sends a Detach Accept message to the MME any time after step 1. The eNodeB forwards this NAS message to the MME along with the TAI+ECGI of the cell which the UE is using.
	If Dual Connectivity is active for the UE, the PSCell ID shall be included in the Uplink NAS Transport that carries the Detach Accept message.
	If the UE receives Detach Request from the MME via a CSG cell with the cause indicating the UE is not allowed to access this CSG, the UE shall remove this CSG ID and associated PLMN from its Allowed CSG list, if present.
12.	After receiving the Detach Accept message, Delete Session Response and, if appropriate, Detach Acknowledge message, the MME releases the S1-MME signalling connection for the UE by sending an S1 Release Command (Cause) message to the eNodeB. The details of this step are covered in the "S1 Release Procedure", as described in clause 5.3.5 by step 4 to step 6. If the Detach Type requests the UE to make a new attach, the UE reattaches after the RRC Connection Release is completed.
NOTE 3:	In the "S1 Release Procedure", if Dual Connectivity was active at the time of the release, the eNodeB includes the PSCell ID.

5.3.8.3A	SGSN-initiated Detach procedure with ISR activated
The SGSN-Initiated Detach procedure with ISR activated is illustrated in Figure 5.3.8.3A-1. Refer to clause 6.6.2.1 of TS 23.060 [7] for the SGSN-initiated Detach procedure when ISR is not activated.

Figure 5.3.8.3A-1: SGSN-Initiated Detach Procedure with ISR activated
NOTE 1:	For a PMIP-based S5/S8, procedure steps (A) are defined in TS 23.402 [2]. Steps 3, 4 and 5 concern GTP based S5/S8.
1.	The SGSN initiated detach procedure is either explicit (e.g. by O&M intervention) or implicit. The SGSN may implicitly detach a UE, if it has not had communication with UE for a long period of time. The SGSN does not send the Detach Request (Detach Type) message to the UE for implicit detach. The implicit detach is local to the SGSN, i.e. an MME registration will not be detached. If the UE is in PMM-CONNNECTED state the SGSN may explicitly detach the UE by sending a Detach Request message to the UE. The Detach Type may be set to re-attach in which case the UE should re-attach at the end of the detach process. If the UE is in PMM-IDLE state the SGSN pages the UE.
	If this Detach procedure is due to the UE's Detach Request via a CSG cell which the UE is not allowed to access, i.e. the CSG subscription for this CSG ID and associated PLMN is absent or expired, the SGSN shall send a Detach Request to UE with an appropriate cause indicating the UE is not allowed to access this CSG.
2.	Any EPS Bearer Context information in the Serving GW regarding this particular UE and related to the SGSN is deactivated by the SGSN sending Delete Session Request (LBI, User Location Information (ECGI)) message per PDN connection to the Serving GW. If the UE Time Zone has changed, the SGSN includes the UE Time Zone IE in this message.
3.	Because the Serving GW receives this message in ISR activated state, the Serving GW deactivates ISR, releases the SGSN related EPS Bearer context information and acknowledges with Delete Session Response (Cause).
4.	Because ISR is activated, the SGSN sends Detach Notification (Cause) message to the associated MME. The cause indicates whether it is a local or complete detach.
5.	If cause indicates complete detach then the MME sends a Delete Session Request (LBI, User Location Information (ECGI)) message per PDN connection to the Serving GW. If Cause indicates local detach then MME deactivates ISR and steps 5 to 9 shall be skipped. If the UE Time Zone has changed, the MME includes the UE Time Zone IE in this message.
6.	The Serving GW sends a Delete Session Request (LBI, User Location Information (ECGI or CGI/SAI)) message per PDN connection to the PDN GW. This message indicates that all bearers belonging to that PDN connection shall be released. If the MME and/or SGSN sends UE's Location Information and/or UE Time Zone in step 2 and/or step 5, the S-GW includes the User Location Information and/or UE Time Zone Information with the least age in this message.
7.	The PDN GW acknowledges with Delete Session Response (Cause) message.
8.	The PDN GW employs an IP CAN Session Termination procedure as defined in TS 23.203 [6] with the PCRF to indicate to the PCRF that the EPS Bearer(s) are released if a PCRF is configured. If requested by the PCRF the PDN GW indicates User Location Information and/or UE Time Zone Information to the PCRF as defined in TS 23.203 [6].
9.	The Serving GW acknowledges with Delete Session Response (Cause) message.
10.	The MME sends Detach Acknowledge message to the SGSN.
11.	If the UE receives the Detach Request message from the SGSN in the step 1, the UE sends a Detach Accept message to the SGSN any time after step 1.
	If the UE receives Detach Request from the SGSN via a CSG cell with the cause indicating the UE is not allowed to access this CSG, the UE shall remove this CSG ID and associated PLMN from its Allowed CSG list, if present.
12.	After receiving the Detach Accept message, if Detach Type did not request the UE to make a new attach, then the 3G SGSN releases the PS signalling connection.
Clause:	Clause 4.7.7.3	4.7.7.3	APN Rate Control
The APN Rate Control is configured in the PDN GW or in the SCEF. The PDN GW or SCEF can send an APN Uplink Rate Control command to the UE using the PCO information element.
The APN Uplink Rate Control applies to data PDUs sent on that APN by either Data Radio Bearers (S1-U) or Signalling Radio Bearers (NAS Data PDUs).
The rate control information is separate for uplink and downlink and in the form of:
-	a positive integer 'number of packets per time unit', and
-	an indication as to whether or not exception reports can still be sent if this rate control limit has been met, and
-	if the UE indicated support for it, an integer 'number of additional allowed exception report packets per time unit' once the rate control limit has been reached.
UEs supporting APN Rate Control shall support the 'number of additional allowed exception report packets per time unit' and shall provide an indication to the CN at PDN connection establishment.
NOTE 1:	Pre-Rel-14 UEs do not support the 'number of additional allowed exception report packets per time unit' and do not send an indication to the CN at PDN connection establishment.
The UE shall comply with this uplink rate control instruction. If the UE exceeds the uplink 'number of packets per time unit', the UE may still send uplink exception reports if allowed and the 'number of additional allowed exception reports per time unit' has not been exceeded. The UE shall consider this rate control instruction as valid until it receives a new one from either PDN GW or from SCEF.
When the last PDN connection using a given APN is released, the APN Rate Control Status (including the number of packets still allowed in the given time unit, the number of additional exception reports still allowed in the given time unit and the termination time of the current APN Rate Control validity period) may be stored in the MME so that it can be retrieved for a subsequent re-establishment of a new first PDN connection for that given APN.
At subsequent establishment of a new first PDN connection for that given APN, the PDN GW/SCEF may receive the previously stored APN Rate Control Status and, if the first APN Rate Control validity period has not expired, it applies the received APN Rate Control Status and provides the related parameters to the UE in the PCO (instead of the configured APN Rate Control parameters). If the initially applied parameters differ from the configured APN Rate Control parameters, the PDN GW/SCEF uses the configured APN Rate Control parameters once the first APN Rate Control validity period expires, and sends an update to the UE with the configured APN Rate Control parameters.
NOTE 2:	The storage of the APN Rate Control Status information for very long time intervals can be implementation specific.
The PDN GW or SCEF realises the APN rate control based on a 'maximum allowed rate' per direction. If PDN GW or SCEF provided the 'number of additional allowed exception report packets per time unit' to the UE, then the 'maximum allowed rate' is equal to the 'number of packets per time unit' plus the 'number of additional allowed exception report packets per time unit'. Otherwise, the 'maximum allowed rate' is equal to the 'number of packets per time unit'.
NOTE 3:	Pre-Rel-14 UEs understand only the 'number of packets per time unit', and, if an indication that exception reports are allowed has been sent to such UEs, there is a risk that exception report packets are discarded by the PDN GW or SCEF. To overcome this problem, the PDN GW or SCEF can still apply a configured 'number of additional allowed exception report packets per time unit' even though not sent to pre-Rel-14 UEs.
The PDN GW or SCEF may enforce the uplink rate by discarding or delaying packets that exceed the 'maximum allowed rate'. The PDN GW or SCEF shall enforce the downlink rate by discarding or delaying packets that exceed the downlink part of the 'maximum allowed rate'.
NOTE 4:	It is assumed that the Serving PLMN Rate is sufficiently high to not interfere with the APN Rate Control as the APN Rate Control, if used, is assumed to allow fewer messages. NAS PDUs related to exception reports are not subject to the Serving PLMN Rate Control.
Clause:	Clause 5.3.5	5.3.5	S1 release procedure
This procedure is used to release the logical S1-AP signalling connection (over S1-MME) and all S1 bearers (in S1-U) for a UE. This Procedure releases the S11-U bearer in Control Plane CIoT EPS Optimisation (except in the case of buffering in MME), instead of the S1-U bearer. The procedure will move the UE from ECM-CONNECTED to ECM-IDLE in both the UE and MME, and all UE related context information is deleted in the eNodeB. When the S1-AP signalling connection is lost, e.g. due to loss of the signalling transport or because of an eNodeB or MME failure, the S1 release procedure is performed locally by the eNodeB and by the MME. When the S1 release procedure is performed locally by the eNodeB or by the MME each node performs locally its actions as described in the procedure flow below without using or relying on any of the signalling shown directly between eNodeB and MME.
If Service Gap Control shall be applied for the UE (see clause 4.3.17.9) and the Service Gap timer is not already running, the Service Gap timer shall be started in MME and UE when entering ECM-IDLE, unless the connection was initiated after a paging of an MT event, or after a TAU procedure without any active flag set or signalling active flag set.
The initiation of S1 Release procedure is either:
-	eNodeB-initiated with cause e.g. O&M Intervention, Unspecified Failure, User Inactivity, Repeated RRC signalling Integrity Check Failure, Release due to UE generated signalling connection release, CS Fallback triggered, Inter-RAT Redirection, UE using satellite access moved out of PLMN serving area, etc. as defined in TS 36.413 [36]; or
-	MME-initiated with cause e.g. authentication failure, detach, not allowed CSG cell (e.g. the CSG ID of the currently used CSG cell expires or is removed from the CSG subscription data), etc.
Both eNodeB-initiated and MME-initiated S1 release procedures are shown in Figure 5.3.5-1.

Figure 5.3.5-1: S1 Release Procedure
1a.	In certain cases the eNodeB may release the UE's signalling connection before or in parallel to requesting the MME to release the S1 context, e.g. the eNodeB initiates an RRC Connection Release for CS Fallback by redirection. If the reason for the release is that the eNodeB received Release Assistance Indicator in Access Stratum as defined in TS 36.321 [87], the eNodeB should not immediately release the RRC connection, instead send S1 UE context Release Request with appropriate cause value e.g. user inactivity.
1b.	If the eNodeB detects a need to release the UE's signalling connection and all radio bearers for the UE, the eNodeB sends an S1 UE Context Release Request (Cause) message to the MME. Cause indicates the reason for the release (e.g. O&M intervention, unspecified failure, user inactivity, repeated integrity checking failure, or release due to UE generated signalling connection release).
	If the PLMN has configured secondary RAT reporting and the eNodeB has Secondary RAT usage data to report, the Secondary RAT usage data is included in S1 UE Context Release Request.
NOTE 1:	Step 1 is only performed when the eNodeB-initiated S1 release procedure is considered. Step 1 is not performed and the procedure starts with Step 2 when the MME-initiated S1 release procedure is considered.
	The MME upon receiving S1 UE Context Release Request with Cause=user inactivity continues with the S1 release procedure unless the MME is aware of pending MT traffic or signalling and/or NAS Release Assistance Information that may have been received in NAS PDU when Control Plane CIoT EPS Optimisation is used, which indicates that downlink data is expected.
	The MME upon receiving S1 UE Context Release Request with Cause indicating the release is requested due to a UE using satellite access moved out of PLMN serving area, may detach the UE as described in clause 5.3.8.3 before continuing with the S1 Release procedure.
	For Control Plane CIoT EPS Optimisation with data buffering in the MME, step 2 and step 3 are skipped.
2.	The MME sends a Release Access Bearers Request (Abnormal Release of Radio Link Indication, Secondary RAT usage data) message to the S-GW that requests the release of all S1-U bearers for the UE, or the S11-U in Control Plane CIoT EPS Optimisation if buffering is in the S-GW. This message is triggered either by an S1 Release Request message from the eNodeB, or by another MME event. The Abnormal Release of Radio Link Indication is included if the S1 release procedure is due to an abnormal release of the radio link. If secondary RAT usage data was received in Step 1b, the MME includes Secondary RAT usage data in this message.
3.	If the S-GW has received a Release Access Bearers Request, the S-GW releases all eNodeB related information (address and TEIDs), or the MME TEIDs related information in Control Plane CIoT EPS Optimisation (address and TEIDs), for the UE and responds with a Release Access Bearers Response message to the MME. Other elements of the UE's S-GW context are not affected. The S-GW retains the S1-U configuration that the S-GW allocated for the UE's bearers. The S-GW starts buffering downlink packets received for the UE and initiating the "Network Triggered Service Request" procedure, described in clause 5.3.4.3, if downlink packets arrive for the UE. In Control Plane CIoT EPS Optimisation Downlink data triggers Mobile Terminated Data transport in NAS signalling defined in clause 5.3.4B.3.
NOTE 2:	Based on operator policy any received Indication of "Abnormal Release of Radio Link" may be used by Serving GW in subsequent decisions to trigger PDN charging pause if the feature has been enabled on that PDN.
4.	The MME releases S1 by sending the S1 UE Context Release Command (Cause) message to the eNodeB.
5.	If the RRC connection is not already released, the eNodeB sends a RRC Connection Release message to the UE in Acknowledged Mode. Once the message is acknowledged by the UE, the eNodeB deletes the UE's context.
6.	The eNodeB confirms the S1 Release by returning an S1 UE Context Release Complete (ECGI, TAI, Secondary RAT usage data) message to the MME. With this, the signalling connection between the MME and the eNodeB for that UE is released. This step shall be performed promptly after step 4, e.g. it shall not be delayed in situations where the UE does not acknowledge the RRC Connection Release.
	If Dual Connectivity was activated by that eNodeB at the time of the release or earlier by that eNodeB, the eNodeB shall include the last known PSCell ID and the time elapsed since the Dual Connectivity was released.
	If the eNodeB supports WUS, the eNodeB should include the Information On Recommended Cells And eNodeBs For Paging in the S1 UE Context Release Complete message; otherwise, the eNodeB may include the Information On Recommended Cells And eNodeBs For Paging in the S1 UE Context Release Complete message. If available, the MME shall store this information to be used when paging the UE.
	The eNodeB includes Information for Enhanced Coverage, if available, in the S1 UE Context Release Complete message.
	If the PLMN has configured secondary RAT usage data reporting, the eNodeB has not included Secondary RAT usage data at step 1b, and the eNodeB has Secondary RAT usage data to report, the Secondary RAT usage data is included in this message. If Secondary RAT usage data was included at step 1b then MME ignores Secondary RAT usage data at step 6.
	The MME deletes any eNodeB related information ("eNodeB Address in Use for S1-MME", "MME UE S1 AP ID" and "eNodeB UE S1AP ID") from the UE's MME context, but, retains the rest of the UE's MME context including the S-GW's S1-U configuration information (address and TEIDs). All non-GBR EPS bearers established for the UE are preserved in the MME and in the Serving GW.
	If the cause of S1 release is because of User I inactivity, Inter-RAT Redirection, the MME shall preserve the GBR bearers. If the cause of S1 release is because of CS Fallback triggered, further details about bearer handling are described in TS 23.272 [58]. Otherwise, e.g. Radio Connection With UE Lost, S1 signalling connection lost, eNodeB failure the MME shall trigger the MME Initiated Dedicated Bearer Deactivation procedure (clause 5.4.4.2) for the GBR bearer(s) of the UE after the S1 Release procedure is completed.
NOTE 3:	EPC does not support the GPRS preservation feature with setting the MBR for GBR bearers to zero.
NOTE 4:	The MME can defer the deactivation of GBR bearers for a short period (in the order of seconds) upon receipt of an S1AP UE Context Release Request due to radio reasons, so as to allow the UE to re-establish the corresponding radio and S1-U bearers and thus avoid deactivation of the GBR bearers.
	If LIPA is active for a PDN connection, the HeNB informs the collocated L-GW by internal signalling to releases the direct user plane path to the HeNB. After the direct user plane path is released, if downlink packets arrive for the UE, the L-GW forwards the first packet on the S5 tunnel to the S-GW to initiate the "Network Triggered Service Request" procedure, as described in clause 5.3.4.3.
7.	If the eNodeB provided and MME accepted Secondary RAT usage data in step 6 (i.e. MME initiated S1 release), the MME initiates the Secondary RAT usage data reporting procedure in clause 5.7A.3 as illustrated in figure 5.7A.3-2 (steps 7a - 7d). If PGW secondary RAT usage reporting is active, steps 7b and 7c are performed, otherwise only steps 7a and 7d are performed.
	If the eNodeB provided Secondary RAT usage data in step 1b (i.e. eNodeB initiated S1 release) and PGW secondary RAT usage data reporting is active, the MME initiates the Secondary RAT usage data reporting procedure in clause 5.7A.3 as illustrated in figure 5.7A.3-2.

5.3.5A	Connection Resume procedure
This procedure is used by the UE to resume the ECM-connection if the UE and the network support User Plane CIoT EPS Optimisation and the UE has stored the necessary information to conduct the Connection Resume procedure (see TS 36.300 [5]) otherwise the Service Request procedures are used, see clause 5.3.4.

Figure 5.3.5A-1: UE initiated Connection Resume procedure
1.	The UE triggers the Random Access procedure to the eNodeB, see TS 36.300 [5].
2.	The UE triggers the RRC Connection Resume procedure including information needed by the eNodeB to access the UE's stored AS context, see TS 36.300 [5]. The E-UTRAN performs security checks. EPS bearer state synchronization is performed between the UE and the network, i.e. the UE shall locally remove any EPS bearer for which no radio bearer is setup and which is not a Control Plane CIoT EPS bearer. If the radio bearer for a default EPS bearer is not established, the UE shall locally deactivate all EPS bearers associated to that default EPS bearer.
3.	The eNodeB notifies the MME that the UE's RRC connection is resumed in the S1-AP UE Context Resume Request message which includes an RRC resume cause. If the eNodeB is not able to admit all suspended bearers, the eNodeB shall indicate this in the list of rejected EPS bearers, see TS 36.413 [36].
	When the UE attempts to establish a signalling connection and the following conditions are met:
	the eNodeB serves more than one country (e.g. it supports E-UTRA satellite access); and
-	the eNodeB knows in what country the UE is located; and
-	the eNodeB is connected to MMEs serving different PLMNs of different countries; and
-	the UE provides an S-TMSI or GUMMEI, which indicates an MME serving a different country to where the UE is currently located; and
-	the eNodeB is configured to enforce selection of the MME based on the country the UE is currently located;
	then the eNodeB shall select an MME serving a PLMN corresponding to the UE's current location and send the S1-AP UE Context Resume Request message to that MME (this is intended to cause the resume procedure to fail).
	If there is a Service Gap timer running in the MME for the UE and the MME is not waiting for a MT paging response from the UE and the RRC Connection Establishment Cause for the Connection Resume Request is not 'mo-Signalling', the MME rejects the resume request by sending a S1-AP UE Context Resume Reject message to eNodeB.
NOTE:	If the UE then sends a subsequent Service Request while the Service Gap timer is running, the MME will send a Service Reject NAS message to the UE with a Mobility Management back-off timer corresponding to the remaining time of the current Service Gap timer (see procedure in clause 5.3.4).
	The MME enters the ECM-CONNECTED state. The MME identifies that the UE returns at the eNodeB for which MME has stored data related to the S1AP association, UE Context and bearer context including the DL TEID(s), necessary to resume the connection, see Connection Suspend procedure in clause 5.3.4A.
	If a default EPS bearer is not accepted by the eNodeB, all the EPS bearers associated to that default bearer shall be treated as non-accepted bearers. The MME releases the non-accepted and non-established bearers by triggering the bearer release procedure as specified in clause 5.4.4.2.
	To assist Location Services, the eNodeB indicates the UE's Coverage Level to the MME.
3a.	If the S1-U connection is resumed and the UE is accessing via the NB-IoT RAT with the RRC resume cause set to "MO exception data", the MME should notify the Serving Gateway of each use of this establishment cause by the MO Exception Data Counter. The MME maintains the MO Exception Data Counter and sends it to the Serving GW as indicated in TS 29.274 [43].
3b.	The Serving Gateway should notify the PDN GW if the RRC establishment cause "MO Exception Data" has been used by the MO Exception Data Counter (see TS 29.274 [43]). The Serving GW indicates each use of this RRC establishment cause by the related counter on its CDR.
3c.	The PDN GW indicates each use of the RRC establishment cause "MO Exception Data" by the related counter on its CDR.
4.	MME acknowledges the connection resumption in S1-AP UE Context Resume Response message. If the MME is not able to admit all suspended E-RABs the MME shall indicate this in the E-RABs Failed To Resume List IE.
5.	If the MME included in step 4 a list of E-RABs failed to resume, the eNodeB reconfigures the radio bearers.
6.	The uplink data from the UE can now be forwarded by eNodeB to the Serving GW. The eNodeB sends the uplink data to the Serving GW address and TEID stored during the Connection Suspend procedure, see clause 5.3.4A. The Serving GW forwards the uplink data to the PDN GW.
7.	The MME sends a Modify Bearer Request message (eNodeB address, S1 TEID(s) (DL) for the accepted EPS bearers, Delay Downlink Packet Notification Request, RAT Type) per PDN connection to the Serving GW. If the Serving GW supports Modify Access Bearers Request procedure and if there is no need for the Serving GW to send the signalling to the PDN GW, the MME may send Modify Access Bearers Request (eNodeB address(es) and TEIDs for downlink user plane for the accepted EPS bearers, Delay Downlink Packet Notification Request) per UE to the Serving GW to optimise the signalling. The Serving GW is now able to transmit downlink data towards the UE.
	The MME and the Serving GW clears the DL Data Buffer Expiration Time in their UE contexts if it was set, to remember that any DL data buffered for a UE using power saving functions has been delivered and to avoid any unnecessary user plane setup in conjunction with a later TAU.
8.	The Serving GW shall return a Modify Bearer Response (Serving GW address and TEID for uplink traffic) to the MME as a response to a Modify Bearer Request message, or a Modify Access Bearers Response (Serving GW address and TEID for uplink traffic) as a response to a Modify Access Bearers Request message. If the Serving GW cannot serve the MME Request in the Modify Access Bearers Request message without S5/S8 signalling other than to unpause charging in the PDN GW or without corresponding Gxc signalling when PMIP is used over the S5/S8 interface, it shall respond to the MME with indicating that the modifications are not limited to S1-U bearers, and the MME shall repeat its request using a Modify Bearer Request message per PDN connection.
	If SIPTO at the Local Network is active for a PDN connection with stand-alone GW deployment and the Local Home Network ID for stand-alone accessed by the UE differs from the Local Home Network ID where the UE initiated the SIPTO@LN PDN Connection, the MME shall request disconnection of the SIPTO at the local network PDN connection(s) with the "reactivation requested" cause value according to clause 5.10.3. If the UE has no other PDN connection, the MME initiated "explicit detach with reattach required" procedure according to clause 5.3.8.3.
	If SIPTO at the Local Network is active for a PDN connection with collocated LGW deployement and the L-GW CN address of the cell accessed by the UE differs from the L-GW CN address of the cell where the UE initiated the SIPTO at the Local Network PDN Connection, the MME shall request disconnection of the SIPTO at the local network PDN connection(s) with the "reactivation requested" cause value according to clause 5.10.3. If the UE has no other PDN connection, the MME initiated "explicit detach with reattach required" procedure according to clause 5.3.8.3.

5.3.5B	MT-EDT procedure for User Plane CIoT EPS Optimisation

Figure 5.3.5B-1: MT-EDT procedure for User Plane CIoT EPS Optimization
1.	Same as step 1 in clause 5.3.4.3.
2.	Same as step 2 in clause 5.3.4.3, with the following addition:;
	The Serving-GW may send the downlink data size to the MME for MT-EDT consideration if the downlink data is applicable for User Plane CIoT EPS Optimisation and MT-EDT is applicable for this PDN connection.
3.	Same as step 3 in clause 5.3.4.3, with the following addition;
	If MT-EDT is applicable for the PDN Connection, the MME may include the downlink data size in the Paging message to assist eNodeB to use MT-EDT.
4.	Same as step 4 in cluse 5.3.4.3, with the following addition;
	If data size is included in Paging message from MME, the eNodeB may decide to use MT-EDT, by adding a MT-EDT indication in the Paging message to the UE.
5-8. Follow the procedure as defined in clause 7.3b.3 in TS 36.300 [5].
9.	SGW delivers downlink data to RAN.
10-11.	The eNodeB can decide to use MT-EDT and move the UE to IDLE mode.